   Reuters Institute Journalist Fellowship Paper
               University of Oxford




  ​HOW TO BUILD A SUCCESSFUL

 SUBSCRIPTION NEWS BUSINESS:
LESSONS FROM BRITAIN AND SPAIN



             by ​Eduardo Suárez


                   February 2020
            2019 Hilary and Trinity Terms
                  Sponsor: Google
Table of contents
1. The rise of subscriptions​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….……….​8

1.1. Subscriptions: why now…………..…………..…………..…………..……..…..……………….9

1.2. News subscriptions: an old story.…………..…………..…………..…………..………….....10

1.3. What this paper is (and what is not).………..…………..…………..………………………..13

1.4. Why Spain and the United Kingdom.………..…………..…………..……………………….13


2. Executive summary.​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….……..​16


3. Things to do before you start.​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….……​21

3.1. Focus sharply on your core audience.………..…………..…………..………………………23

3.2. Rethink your organisation.………..…………..…………..…………………………………....24

3.3. Learn to tell your own story..……..………..…………..…………..…………………………..25

3.4. How to ‘swallow the fish’.………..…………..…………..……………………………………...26


4. Adapting your value proposition.​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….……..​29

4.1. Focus on your digital product.………..…………..…………..………………………………..30

4.2. Stop doing stuff (really).………..…………..…………..……………………………………….32

4.3. Create great user experience.………..…………..…………..………………………………...32

4.4. Build products your readers can finish.………..…………..…………..…………………….34

4.5. Rethink what to publish and when.………..…………..…………..………………………….37

4.6. Less could be more.………..…………..…………..………….………..…………..…………….38

4.7. Cherish your brand.………..…………..…………..………….………..…………..…………....39


5. Designing the best pricing.​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….………..41

5.1. Ensure your pricing is aligned with your values.………..…………..…………..………...43


                                                                             3
5.2. Experiment in every way you can.………..…………..…………..…………………………...44

5.3. Create attractive bundles.……..…………..…………..………………………………………..46

5.4. Don’t focus on print but use it to your advantage.………..…………..…………………..46

5.5. Different tiers require different strategies.………..…………..…………..………………..47


6. Creating an acquisition strategy.​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…………….50

6.1. Asking for money? Consider where and how.………..…………..…………..…………….53

6.2. Target specific topics and audiences.………..…………..…………..……………………….55

6.3. How to use social media.………..…………..…………..……………………………………....56

6.4. Use registration for acquisition (or maybe not).………..…………..……………………..56

6.5. Reduce friction at every step.………..…………..…………..………….………..………...….58

6.6. Use the right metrics………..…………..…………..…………………………………………….58


7. Fighting churn.​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…………….61

7.1. Habits matter more than content.………..…………..…………..…………………………...63

7.2. Look for churn drivers.………..…………..…………..………………………………………....65

7.3. Dirty channels create churn.………..…………..…………..…………………………………..66

7.4. Watch the 90-day onboarding clock.………..…………..…………..…………………….….66

7.5. Communicate the impact of what you do.………..…………..…………..……..……...….67


8. Conclusion..…………………………………………………………………………………….70


Appendix. Interviewees.​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….………...​73

References​…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….…….………….​74




                                                                            4
To the memory
  of my father




             5
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism and Google for
allowing me to spend six months as a journalist fellow in Oxford. During this period,
I’ve had time to think about the challenges facing journalism and about the best ways
to address them. The Institute is an unparalleled institution. The fellowship has given
me the chance to meet its wonderful team and learn more about their work. It has also
put me in contact with a valuable network of journalists, academics and media
executives. Meeting them has been one of the highlights of my time here.

I would like to thank my supervisor, Rasmus Nielsen, who provided me with valuable
feedback and put me in contact with many people who were relevant for my research.
This paper would be much less informative without his help. I would also like to thank
Meera Selva for her insights and her help along the way. She was the one who
suggested that I focus my research on Spain and the United Kingdom. I’m grateful that
she did.

I would like to express special gratitude to my journalist fellows, whose ideas and
experiences enriched this paper. Their passion for our profession has been a constant
inspiration during my time here. I would like to thank my mentors and friends Ann
Marie Lipinski and Borja Echevarría, who recommended me for this fellowship. I hope
they think it was worth it.

Special thanks are due to my hosts Catherine King, Sunny, Charles and William Pitt,
who fed me and made me feel at home during my time in Oxford. Our dinners gave me
a valuable understanding of how non-journalists view the work we do.

I finished the first draft of this paper a few days before my father was diagnosed with
cancer. He couldn’t speak any English but I showed him the draft anyway. As someone
who gave his life to education, he was very proud of the fact that I was a Journalist




                                                                                          6
Fellow at the University of Oxford. He died on August 25, 2019. This paper is dedicated
to his memory, which will keep shaping my life for the years to come.

Finally, I would like to thank María Ramírez, the love of my life and one of the best
journalists I know. As Head of Strategy of eldiario.es, she is one of the interviewees of
this paper. She encouraged me to come to Oxford and endured the time we spent apart.
She taught me many of the things I know about journalism. This paper would be very
different without her wisdom and her support.




                                                                                            7
1. The rise of subscriptions.
Flower shops are a risky business proposition. Many get a big portion of their revenue
on two single occasions: Mother’s Day and Valentine’s Day. The product they sell is not
perceived as essential. They need to be as close as they can to their best customers and
this requires paying expensive rents to be in high-end neighbourhoods. Then there’s
the inventory problem: flowers start to die the moment you cut them. Within three
weeks, they’re rotting in your fridge.

The founders of American start-up H. Bloom1 solved these problems by creating a
subscription business. They targeted hotels, restaurants and other businesses and
offered them weekly flower delivery, installation and maintenance for a recurring fee. It
was not an easy task. It required partnering with independent flower studios in
different cities, optimizing delivery and creating a national brand. Four years after its
launch, H. Bloom had nearly 1,000 clients and more than $7 million in sales.

Flower shops are not that different from news organisations. Both have to deal with
similar problems: perishable inventory, seasonality, a product that is not perceived as
essential, a lumpy demand. Subscriptions can provide a solution to some of those
problems. Setting them up, however, requires a particular mindset and expertise. This
paper aims to explain how different newspapers are dealing with the different aspects
of this transformation right now.

Subscriptions have many advantages over other business models. They provide a
company with smooth demand, sticky customers and free market research.
Subscriptions open new business possibilities too: you can upgrade your subscribers or
sell them other products on top of their subscription fees. Amazon Prime is the most
famous example but it’s not the only one. The subscription economy has reached




1
 J. Alsever, “How 2 Software Guys Disrupted the Flower Business”, ​Inc​. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.inc.com/jennifer-alsever/inc.500-how-i-did-it-bryan-burkhart-h-bloom.html


                                                                                                       8
almost every industry. It’s possible to find examples of companies offering
subscriptions to razors, art classes, cars, vitamins, chocolate and socks.

Subscription businesses have an important disadvantage. They are cash-strapped at the
beginning. Unless they are wildly successful, it will take them several months to gain
back the cash they spend in acquiring new customers right after launch. Launching a
successful subscription service requires patience, upfront cash and a great
communication strategy. It also requires managers who create a new kind of
organization, data-savvy and integrated around their customers’ needs.


1.1. Subscriptions: why now.

There are at least three reasons for the rise of the subscription economy.

The first one is the rise of broadband Internet around the world, which makes it easier
to build digital services for a sizable market.

The second is the rise of the access generation, millennials and post-millennials who
value access over assets and see any physical possessions as unnecessary baggage. As
Tien Tzuo puts it in ​Subscribed,​ these younger customers want “the ride, not the car.
The milk, not the cow. The new Kanye music, not the new Kanye record.”2 They like
convenience and personalisation, and expect companies to provide them with a reliable
service. These are the customers behind the rise of Zipcar, Netflix and Spotify.

The third factor is the ability to analyze customer behaviour in real-time. “Today
businesses are closer to their customers than ever before,” says John Warrillow in ​The
Automatic Customer.​ “Many consumers buy directly through an online channel, and
those who don’t often interact with the producer directly for post-sale service and
support. All those customer interactions are being fed into mathematical models,
which are run by computers that are now capable of storing and processing billions of



2
    T. Tzuo, ​Subscribed: Why the Subscription Model will be Your Company's Future - and what to do about
it,​ Portfolio Penguin, 2018, p. 17.


                                                                                                       9
data points in seconds.”3 These interactions can create a virtuous cycle. Subscription
companies can watch how their customers use their service and tweak it accordingly.
There’s no need for surveys or focus groups.

Companies used to make a single product and sell it through many channels. Today
customers spend their time across many channels and expect companies to meet their
needs wherever they are. Every channel is best suited for a different product, a group of
customers or a certain part of the customer journey. Quality means different things for
different people at different times. As Sunil Gupta says in ​Driving Digital Strategy​, every
company must identify these complementarities and build around them.4

Nothing illustrates this as well as the rise of Netflix. The old Hollywood studios started
every quarter with nothing in the bank. They put $250 million into producing a
blockbuster and hoped it would get four times that figure. Netflix starts every quarter
with subscription revenue in the bank. Before putting $50 million in a new season of
one of its shows, its executives can review the data. Even if that season is less
successful than expected, it still helps Netflix improve its library, attract new
subscribers and extend the lifetime value of the ones it has.


1.2. News subscriptions: an old story.

As John Warrillow explains, the subscription business model was created by map
publishers in Europe during the 16th century. They would invite their customers to
subscribe to future editions of their maps at a time when new lands were being
discovered and explored. Aristocrats and academics paid a subscription and gave them
the capital they needed to keep on publishing their maps.

Early newspapers adopted the same business model. Subscriptions soon became the
standard business approach for information publishing. Readers subscribed to


3
  J. Warrillow, ​The Automatic Customer. Creating a Subscription Business in Any Industry​, Portfolio
Penguin, 2015, p. 20.
4
  S. Gupta, ​Driving Digital Strategy. A Guide to Reimagining Your Business​, HBR Press, 2018.


                                                                                                        10
general-interest publications. Their subscription fees provided the money needed to
fund production and distribution costs. With the rise of mass audiences, many
newspapers embraced advertising as their main revenue stream in the last half of the
19th century. But the pendulum has started to swing back to different forms of reader
revenue as the rise of technology platforms suck ad money from news companies
around the world.

A few newspapers adopted digital subscriptions in the first years of this century in a
period Spanish academic Ángel Arrese has called “the frenzy of free trials.”5 Most of
these efforts failed. Spanish newspaper El País introduced a pay model in November
2002 for €80 a year.6 The newspaper attracted around 45,000 digital subscribers. The
project was dropped in 2005 as the newspaper lost its leadership in digital and
struggled to grow its subscriber base. The New York Times launched Times Select,7 its
own digital subscription service, in 2005. According to official figures, it reached
227,000 online-only paid subscribers8 at $49.95 a year or $7.95 a month. The project
was discontinued in September 2007. The main reason for closing was the promise of
traffic from search and advertising revenue. “Our projections for growth on that paid
subscriber base were low, compared to the growth of online advertising,” said Vivian L.
Schiller, senior vice president and general manager of nytimes.com at the time.9

There are many reasons why subscriptions didn’t work at the time. Payment systems
were clunky. Digital advertising was still attractive for general newspapers. People
weren’t used to paying for services online. Smartphones and tablets didn’t exist yet.



5
  Á. Arrese, ‘From Gratis to Paywalls’, ​Journalism Studies,​ Vol. 17, No. 8 (2016), pp. 1051-1067.
6
  “EL PAÍS lanza una nueva edición digital a la que se accederá por 0,2 euros diarios”, ​El País​,
November 16, 2002. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://elpais.com/diario/2002/11/16/sociedad/1037401211_850215.html
7
  “What is Times Select”, ​The New York Times.​ Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/products/timesselect/whatis.html
8
  O. Malik, “New York Times To Close Times Select Effective Midnight Tuesday; Will Open Last 20 Years
Of Archives”, ​GigaOm​, September, 17, 2007. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://gigaom.com/2007/09/17/419-new-york-times-to-close-timesselect-effective-wednesday/
9
  R. Pérez-Peña, “Times to Stop Charging for Parts of Its Web Site”, ​The New York Times,​ September 18,
2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from ​https://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/18/business/media/18times.html


                                                                                                     11
Things started to change after the Great Recession. The Financial Times introduced a
flexible pay model in 2007. The Times and The Sunday Times adopted a hard paywall in
2010. The New York Times launched a metered model in March 2011. In the last few
years, many newspapers have followed this path in different flavours. Freemium and
metered models have flourished in European countries as diverse as Finland, Germany,
Italy, Poland and France.10

According to the Digital News Report, most people wouldn’t pay for a digital
subscription to a newspaper. Thirty-four per cent of respondents say they pay for
online news in Norway, 27% in Sweden and 16% in the United States,11 but these
countries remain an exception. Percentages are lower in most of the 38 markets
covered by the report. This doesn’t mean it’s impossible to charge for news. Global
news brands have often been more prosperous on this front than smaller outlets. But
several local and national newspapers have managed to execute successful reader
revenue strategies or at least open a new revenue stream.

Transitioning from a business model based on advertising to one focused on reader
revenue is not an easy task. Advertising is often a volume game. It requires getting as
much traffic as possible. Nothing matters more than raw numbers such as unique users
and page views. Memberships and subscriptions require a different mindset. Any
newspaper willing to adopt them must focus on its most loyal audience, rethink its
organisation and learn to tell its own story compellingly. It must also rewire its value
proposition to the needs of its readers and adapt its digital products to their daily or
weekly routines.

Advertising and reader revenue can be compared to horses pushing in opposite
directions. Unrestrained, digital advertising can encourage clickbait, long loading times

10
   F. M. Simon and L. Graves. “Pay Models in European News”, Reuters Institute for the Study of
Journalism, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2019-05/Paymodels_for_Online_News_FINAL_1.
pdf
11
   R. Fletcher, “Paying for News and the Limits of Subscription”, ​Digital News Report,​ Reuters Institute for
the Study of Journalism, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2019/paying-for-news-and-the-limits-of-subscription/


                                                                                                           12
and bad user experience. Pay models can encourage news inequality and ideological
echo chambers. But they often reward quality journalism and create an environment in
which the interests of the journalists and their audience are closely aligned. For a
subscription company, not every click is created equal. Loyal readers are much more
important than someone who occasionally clicks on an article from Google or
Facebook. Frequency and time spent are more valuable than page views.


1.3. What this paper is (and what is not).

This paper aims to look at the strategies newspapers use when adopting both
memberships and subscriptions. It includes an executive summary and is structured in
five chapters that touch on five aspects every subscription company should pay
attention to: things to do before you start, value proposition, pricing, acquisition and
churn. Every chapter opens with a short vignette explaining how a particular news
organisation has dealt with that particular aspect.

The paper explores what several companies are doing in every one of these aspects
through structured interviews with 26 media executives from 15 news organisations.
Some of these outlets run digital subscriptions. Others have reader revenue models
with a less transactional value proposition. Most of them are based in Spain and the
United Kingdom. Some are based in other European countries such as Denmark,
Sweden, Italy and France.

This paper doesn’t analyze either the virtues of different pay models or the price of the
offerings of every particular newspaper. Its main goal is to explain the strategies news
outlets are applying to deal with the profound changes required by a subscription
business in the hope that some could be used by other news organisations elsewhere.


1.4. Why Spain and the United Kingdom.

Most of the news organisations featured in this paper are based in Spain and the United
Kingdom. These media markets have a few things in common. Both have similar


                                                                                           13
percentages of people willing to pay for news according to the Digital News Report:
10% in Spain, 9% in the U.K.12 Newspapers operating in both countries share the
blessing (also the curse) to publish its content in a global language. Unlike the Nordic
countries, they don’t have the competitive advantage of a language almost no one
speaks outside their market. The Internet provides them with an open field where they
compete with outlets based on the other side of the Atlantic. In this kind of
environment, news outlets like The Guardian and El País decided to pursue traffic
overseas.

Spain and Britain have very different media landscapes. Tabloids and digital-only news
organisations are mostly free in the United Kingdom and operate under the shadow of
the BBC. Most national broadsheets and magazines, however, have been running pay
models for a few years. The Financial Times, The Times and The Sunday Times operate
with hard paywalls. The Telegraph runs a freemium model. The Guardian combines
memberships and contributions with several subscription options. News start-up
Tortoise is exploring a promising model through newsletters, sponsorships and events.

Spain is on the other side of the spectrum. Not a single national legacy news
organisation was running a substantial pay model in July 2019. El País tried and failed
before betting heavily on digital advertising. El Mundo started offering a subscription
to the PDF of its print edition in March 2010.13 It also launched a metered paywall with
25 free articles in October 2013,14 then dropped it in 2018. The number of free articles
was too high to convince most readers to join.




12
   R. Fletcher, “Paying for News and the Limits of Subscription”, ​Digital News Report,​ Reuters Institute for
the Study of Journalism, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2019/paying-for-news-and-the-limits-of-subscription/
13
   “EL MUNDO presenta la forma de leer el periódico 'para todo el siglo XXI'”, ​El Mundo, ​March 4, 2010.
Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.elmundo.es/elmundo/2010/03/03/comunicacion/1267654313.html
14
   “EL MUNDO cambia de piel y todos ganamos”, ​El Mundo​, October 3, 2013. Retrieved on July 28, 2019
from
 ​https://www.elmundo.es/elmundo/2013/10/03/comunicacion/1380754334.html


                                                                                                           14
As I will explain in the next chapters, some Spanish news organisations run reader
revenue models. In January 2020, digital-only newspaper eldiario.es had more than
35,000 members. One-third of its revenue comes from its readers and it has been
profitable since 2013, the year after its launch. The other exception comes from a few
local newspapers. In April 2019 Catalan newspaper Ara had more than 45,000
subscribers, 23,000 of which were digital-only. Vocento media group has launched
digital subscriptions in five of its 11 local newspapers. Around 27,000 readers had
joined in March 2019. Competitors such as Prensa Ibérica recently launched digital
subscriptions too.

The Spanish media landscape started to change in the autumn of 2019. El Mundo
launched a freemium subscription model in October 2019.15 El País is launching a
metered paywall in the first quarter of 2020.16

Most national newspapers are preparing to adopt digital subscriptions soon. Local and
digital-only news organisations could launch a pay model too. This paper is aimed at
any media executive who is planning to transition into a reader revenue model either in
Spain or in any other country. Some of the strategies covered here could be applied by
people working in other media markets. I hope the expertise and innovation I’ve seen
in many British news organisations will be an inspiration for so many media brands
that are struggling in Spain and Latin America. I also hope media executives in the U.K.
will learn from the ingenuity and the resilience I’ve seen in news organisations that
operate on the other side of the British Channel, often with fewer resources than them.
Journalism benefits from cross-pollination. Ideas from other countries and other
industries can help it flourish and endure.




15
   ​https://www.elmundo.es/television/2019/10/21/5dadf08921efa04f7e8b45fc.html​ as seen on February
17, 2020.
16
   https://www.elespanol.com/economia/medios/20200117/pais-ultima-detalles-muro-poroso-lanzarlo-marz
o/459454914_0.html​ as seen on February 17, 2020.



                                                                                                 15
2. Executive summary.
Pay models require a different kind of organisation. ​Successful subscription
companies break silos and create cross-functional teams. Marketing, technology and
editorial work closely and obsess about customers’ needs. The best media executives
make sure everyone knows the metrics that matter. Facebook likes, page views, and
unique users are now valued mostly as means towards an end —acquisition and
retention of paying subscribers. Frequency, recency and time spent mean readers are
getting value from your site. The goal of every news outlet should be to get more
people to enjoy its content more often during more time. Loyalty is the first step
towards a subscription. Occasional readers never subscribe.

Every newspaper must learn to tell its own story.​ There will always be outlets
offering free access to their news content. Any company with a pay model must explain
why readers should support its work. This appeal should be crafted carefully. It must
take into account the mission of the organisation as well as its ownership, its history
and its constraints. Journalists should explain how they do what they do. Media
executives should be as transparent as possible in their financial reports. Newspapers
could benefit from presenting themselves within a broader social narrative. A
conversation with their readers could help frame a narrative that is clear and attractive.
Any news brand must mean something. Anything it does should be aligned with its
editorial mission. Paying readers are less forgiving than occasional users. Clickbait can
destroy trust.

Subscription companies must obsess about their core audience. ​Most of the reader
revenue of every newspaper with a pay model comes from a small percentage of their
readers. These are the ones most attached to the brand and most likely to subscribe.
Media executives should look at the behaviour of these readers. Their goal should be to
learn what their news habits are, how they structure their news diet, what they’re




                                                                                          16
looking for when they come. News organisations should learn as much as possible
about this group and should think of strategies to grow it. Their future depends on this.

The best newspapers focus on their digital products.​ Most of the legacy outlets
covered by this paper still get most of their revenue from print. Their top priority,
however, is improving their digital properties. This is not an easy task. Loyal readers
are not uniform. Their consumption patterns could be all over the map. Quality often
means different things to different people. Every channel requires a different language
and different skills. The best companies invest their resources on the platforms that are
popular among their core users and adapt their processes and priorities to their needs.
This could mean producing audio versions of your best stories or creating niche
editorial products for audiences that are underserved.

Good user experience is essential to succeed.​ News organisations are realising that
content is just one of the aspects of their value proposition. User experience is almost
as important, especially on a mobile phone. A great editorial product can fail as a result
of poor user experience. On the other hand, great user experience could be a great
selling point for a news organisation: The Guardian lets everyone read every article in
its website, but makes readers pay to read some of those articles or a daily edition in its
premium apps. The most successful news organisations think thoroughly about loading
time, packaging and presentation. Younger audiences are used to the high standards
set by digital platforms. They don’t accept pop-up windows or invasive ads.

Readers appreciate a product they can finish. ​In a world dominated by endless news
feeds, finite editions are having a comeback as a way to foster loyalty among
subscribers and recreate the news habits of the past. Older readers still love to read the
electronic versions of the print editions. Younger audiences gravitate towards daily
podcasts, niche newsletters or news digests bundled into cheaper subscriptions.
Readers appreciate news products they can finish. Journalists should remember their
job is not so much publishing everything as editing what is important. Their work




                                                                                          17
shouldn’t be guided by outdated processes but by the routines of their current
audience.

Print shouldn’t be the focus but it could help. ​A print product could be
overwhelming or pointless for a portion of your digital audience. But print can still be
an asset today. Newspapers face a strategic dilemma: most of their growth comes from
digital, but most of their revenue still comes from print. The most successful
companies adapt their content to the language of every channel where its loyal readers
spend their time and print is a channel too. The Guardian uses price hikes to transform
anonymous buyers into print subscribers and repackages some of its articles into a new
glossy weekly magazine. The Economist creates most of its daily picks from articles
already published in the print edition of the magazine.

The best subscription companies experiment with pricing. ​Newspapers have
produced a single product and sold it for a single price for the last couple of centuries.
Digital subscriptions require a different mindset, much more open to experimenting
with bundles and price points. Discounts and free trials could be in your toolbox. But
you should make it very clear to your readers they enter into a paid relationship.
Otherwise, you will attract people who won’t stay for long. Hard data, not gut feelings
should guide your decisions. Any changes on pricing should be made after reviewing
the behaviour of the people most likely to subscribe. Newspapers are partnering with
other news organisations. Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter offers bundles with The
New York Times and with a few local newspapers. Spanish newspaper eldiario.es offers
bundles with a couple of magazines.

Open vs closed is not the right framework. ​The difference between membership and
subscription models is more blurred than ever before. Some news organisations with a
membership model run very hard paywalls while newspapers with subscriptions allow
sampling opportunities through free trials, social and search. Open news organisations
are more closed than you think, and vice versa. The Guardian runs a successful
subscription business. The FT ran an open WhatsApp channel and still publishes audio



                                                                                         18
and video content for free. The most successful news outlets are not attached to their
models. They tweak them according to the behaviour of their audience and experiment
with bundles and revenue streams. The shape of your paywall must be just one of the
elements of your value proposition. Newsletters, podcasts, audiobooks, trips, discounts
and events must be added to the mix.

Journalism is the best acquisition strategy. ​Every news organisation covered by this
report experiment with search and social channels. But everyone says that nothing
beats journalism as an acquisition tool. Memberships and subscriptions are not impulse
sales. People start paying after engaging with a news organisation regularly for a long
time. Creating news habits is the best way to get subscribers and reduce churn. Readers
often convert after reading long-form pieces and investigations that force politicians to
resign. Quality and consistency are important for every subscription company but also
for newspapers with a less transactional value proposition. News sites should perfect
the way they ask for the support of their audience. They should test different messages
and try to answer with them any questions they could have.

Friction is your enemy. ​Subscribing or donating to a news outlet should be as easy as
possible. Newspapers should take a page from technology start-ups and adopt
frictionless payment systems. Anyone should be able to subscribe in a few seconds.
Anyone should be able to cancel its subscription without making a phone call. Creating
a seamless payment system is especially difficult for global news organisations, whose
managers have to deal with different platforms and different regulations. You won’t
reduce your churn rate unless you get your customers into reliable payment systems.
Many cancellations are the result of credit cards’ expiration dates.

Churn is much more important than acquisition. ​Getting thousands of subscribers
who leave a few months after they join is not a sustainable path for any news
organisation. This is why acquisition and churn strategies should be run by the same
team. Dirty acquisition channels bring in the wrong kind of customers and produce
high churn rates. Good subscription companies design great onboarding experiences



                                                                                         19
and encourage their readers to make the most of their subscription in the first few days.
They also segment their users by demographics and by the time they joined. Creating
habits matters much more than showing any particular piece of content. Retention
often correlates with frequency and time spent.




                                                                                      20
3. Things to do before you start.
The Guardian launched its membership model on September 10, 2014.17 According to a
news article published at the time, the original scheme focused on “a rolling
programme of events, discussions, debates, interviews, keynote speeches and
festivals.”18 It had three tiers: friends, partners and patrons. Friends didn’t pay
anything. Partners paid £15 a month and could get discounts and priority bookings for
some of the events. Patrons paid £60 a month and had an extra level of access. They
could enjoy newsroom tours and host their own events in The Shed, a listed building by
King’s Cross station which was set to open in 2016.

It was an important moment for The Guardian. A few weeks later, it would overtake The
New York Times19 as the second most popular English-language newspaper behind the
Daily Mail. It had published scoops such as the Edward Snowden revelations and the
phone-hacking scandal. It had just won its first Pulitzer Prize.20

The newspaper’s finances, however, didn’t look good. Circulation had been cut in half
in a few years.21 It had just posted an annual loss of £30.6m.22 It would lose £227m from

17
   ​L. O’Reilly,​ “​Why the Guardian believes readers will pay £15 a month to become members”, ​Marketing
Week,​ September 10, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.marketingweek.com/2014/09/10/why-the-guardian-believes-readers-will-pay-15-a-month-to-b
ecome-members/
18
   M. Sweeney, “Guardian launches new three-tier membership scheme”, ​The Guardian,​ September 10,
2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/sep/10/guardian-membership-scheme-patrons-kings-cross
19
    ​M. Sweeney​, “​The Guardian overtakes New York Times in comScore traffic figures”, ​The Guardian​,
October 21, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/21/the-guardian-overtakes-new-york-times-in-comscore-traf
fic-figures
20
   E. Pilkington, “Guardian and Washington Post win Pulitzer prize for NSA revelations”, ​The Guardian,​
April 14, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/14/guardian-washington-post-pulitzer-nsa-revelations
21
   “ABCs: National daily newspaper circulation September 2014”, ​The Guardian,​ October 10, 2014.
Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/media/table/2014/oct/10/abcs-national-newspapers
22
     ​D. Ponsford, “Guardian losses flat year on year at £30.6m but Trader sale swells bank balance to
£842.7m”, ​Press Gazette​, July 8, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.pressgazette.co.uk/guardian-losses-flat-year-on-year-at-306m-but-trader-sale-swells-bank-ba
lance-to-8427m/


                                                                                                      21
2009 to 2016.23 Part of those losses had to do with an expensive American expansion.
The Guardian was the eighth player in a small market like Britain. The United States
was a much bigger market and held plenty of opportunity. American readers were
richer and much easier to monetise.

The American operation brought millions of readers but not enough revenue.
Circulation and print advertising were still falling. With other British newspapers
setting up paywalls, many people wondered whether The Guardian would follow suit.

The Guardian’s membership model started to take shape at a readers’ conference in
March 2012. During a session with Clay Shirky, editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger said the
audience would have to pay to sustain The Guardian, then asked them a question.
Would they prefer a plastic bucket or a loyalty club? Giving money to the newspaper as
a cause or paying a monthly fee to get tickets and discounts? “Readers were incredibly
unenthusiastic about tickets,” says Rusbridger. “But many were willing to give money
so our journalism could be available for everyone as a public good. They saw The
Guardian as a cause.”

Consultants hired by the business side came to the same conclusion but the board
didn’t believe it. “They thought it was editorial moonshine,” says Rusbridger. He
remembers the words of one of the senior managers. “I can’t have a plastic bucket and
go to Dolce & Gabbana [to sell ads],” he said. According to Rusbridger, there was a
complete mismatch between readers who kept saying ‘we’d really love to give you
money’ and the board saying ‘no, we’ll give you tickets.’”

The original membership model, built around events, didn’t take off. It gathered
around 12,000 members in the first year. “It was appealing to certain people who lived
in certain areas. But given our global readership, it wasn’t a benefit that many people




23
  A. Rajan, “Guardian records first operating profit since 1998”, ​BBC,​ May 1, 2019, Retrieved on July 28,
2019 from ​https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-48111464


                                                                                                         22
could partake,” says Amanda Michel, who is now the global director and senior product
manager for Contributions at The Guardian. Michel started to work in this area in 2016.

At the end of the fiscal year 2018/19, The Guardian had over 655,000 regular
supporters. Around 365,000 were members and recurring contributors. The newspaper
also received over 340,000 one-off contributions from more than 300,000 contributors
around the world.24

The Guardian achieved this remarkable turnaround by shutting down its event business
and putting its editorial mission at the centre of the membership programme. The
management was flexible enough to change tack when the data didn’t support the
initial vision. After all, they realised the plastic bucket was much more powerful than
any loyalty scheme.

“People​ ​on editorial are not good at things like logistics and flexible pricing,” says
Rusbridger. “But commercial people sometimes don’t trust that incredible bond
between the reader and the journalist. They don’t quite get that. We had published an
incredible range of stories throughout the years. So many people said: ‘I will support
you because we think you are what a newspaper should be.’”

Every news organisation should strengthen this bond with its audience before setting
up any kind of reader revenue model but they should also do other things before
performing that difficult transition. I will explore a few in this chapter.


3.1. Focus sharply on your core audience.

Many news organisations are still optimized for traffic. Setting up a pay model requires
reorienting your processes and priorities to focus on your most loyal audience. This is
not an easy task. Commercial departments will warn against losing page views and


24
     “​Guardian Media Group announces outcome of three year turnaround strategy”,​ The Guardian,​ May 1,
2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/2019/may/01/guardian-media-group-announces-outcome-
of-three-year-turnaround-strategy


                                                                                                      23
advertising revenue and some journalists won’t be happy about limiting the reach of
their articles. But you will only succeed if you focus on understanding the needs of your
most loyal audience. Casual users will never subscribe.

Global reach has helped big outlets like The Guardian and The New York Times to get
subscribers around the world. But this hasn’t worked for smaller news organisations,
whose subscribers often come from smaller markets. The tension is especially difficult
in small countries with global languages such as Britain and Spain, where even some
local and regional newspapers have given in to the temptation of pursuing global traffic
through clickbait and gossip news.

“In the last few years, we’ve seen other regional newspapers trying to compete on
traffic with global brands through search and social. I think that’s a mistake. You can’t
produce tons of low-quality content and then sell subscriptions in your local market.
Your brand must mean something,” says Fernando Belzunce, editorial director of local
newspapers at Vocento, a Spanish media group.


3.2. Rethink your organisation.

Subscription businesses require a new mindset and a new kind of organisation,
integrated around the needs of the audience. Any reader revenue strategy needs to
involve people from editorial, technology and the business side. Customers are familiar
with digital services and expect customization, frictionless payments and great user
experience. These things are important and could have an impact on your bottom line.

Data should be at the forefront of any decision making. As author and technologist
Tien Tzuo says, “the more information you can learn about the customer, the better
you can serve their needs, and the more valuable the relationship becomes”25




25
     T. Tzuo, ​Subscribed: Why the subscription model will be your company's future - and what to do about
it,​ Portfolio Penguin, 2018, p. 20.


                                                                                                        24
The Financial Times bridges the gap between marketing and editorial with a weekly
meeting. “We want to know what they’re about to do so we can turn that into both
existing customer engagement opportunities and acquisition opportunities rather than
waiting for the news to hit. This relationship is helping them see the role marketing can
play to turn their content into subscriptions,” says Marie Goddard, head of customer
marketing.

Some Spanish newspapers are using the shift into digital subscriptions to reorganise
their editorial teams. La Vanguardia has integrated both digital and print teams in a
single newsroom. “Achieving this kind of integration is much easier now that we are in
the subscription mindset. It would have been much more difficult a few years ago,” says
Javier Martínez, director of audiences and digital strategy.

As part of their shift into pay models, El País and La Razón are adopting Washington
Post’s Arc publishing system to break silos, integrate many data sources and encourage
experimentation on the editorial and the business side.

El Mundo is creating an expanded express team and a small print hub, where a few
senior editors will repackage content for print. The expansion of the express team
reflects the realities of the Spanish market, where people still go for breaking news to
big legacy newspapers as the public broadcaster is not as dominant as the BBC.
According to managing editor Joaquín Manso, the goal is that most of their journalists
will be reporting and producing valuable content, and not sitting behind a desk.
“There’s nothing more valuable for your readers than taking them to the places they
can’t go,” he says.


3.3. Learn to tell your own story.

After launching its membership model, people at The Guardian noticed many readers
saw the newspaper had 150 million readers and assumed they were making a lot of
money. So they realised they had to explain how advertising revenue was dropping and
why they needed their readers’ support. Another good example was the Scott Trust, the


                                                                                           25
British company who is the only shareholder of The Guardian and whose central
purpose is “to ​secure the financial and editorial independence of The Guardian in
perpetuity as a quality national newspaper without party affiliation.”26 People at the
newspaper assumed the audience knew what the Scott Trust was. But most of the
audience didn’t. So they started articulating its role and why it was so significant. Now
the Scott Trust is as important for the audience as it is for the journalists and the
members of its board.

“As journalists, we have always been telling the stories of other people. Now we also
have to tell our own,” says Amanda Michel.

In a world where many people discover brands through search and social media, telling
your story is more important than ever. Tien Tzuo recommends what he calls the
three-room model. The first room is the story of your product:​ the how​. The second is
the market you’re trying to reach:​ the who​. The third room is an overarching story that
puts your product and your market within a broader social narrative: ​the why now​. “You
should tell your story from the third room to the first one. First the context, then the
market, then the product,” says Tzuo.27


3.4. How to ‘swallow the fish’.

Before adopting a pay model, it’s also important to communicate any changes inside
your news organisation. Companies shifting to a subscription model often face what
authors Thomas Lah and J. B. Wood call “swallowing the fish.”28

The fish is what happens when existing companies go into subscriptions. In the
beginning, their revenues shrink as revenues from large, pay-upfront deals are replaced
by recurring subscriptions without big upfront payments. At the same time, they must

26
     “The Scott Trust: values and history”, ​The Guardian,​ July 26, 2015. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/the-scott-trust/2015/jul/26/the-scott-trust
27
     T. Tzuo, ​Subscribed: Why the subscription model will be your company's future - and what to do about
it,​ Portfolio Penguin, 2018, p. 147.
28
     T. Lah and J.B. Wood, ​Technology-as-a-service: How to Grow a Profitable Subscription business,​
TSIA, 2016.


                                                                                                        26
make investments in many of the new capabilities and structures required to succeed in
the new world. As Tien Tzuo says, “the traditionally profitable and stable mix of more
revenue than costs on the left side of the chart is replaced with a tumultuous period of
costs exceeding revenue.”29

Software company Adobe faced this challenge as it changed its business model.30 It
went from charging $1,800 for a one-time sale to $50 a month for a subscription to
Adobe Creative Cloud, this software suite. The company faced a short-term shock as its
main source of income disappeared. Processes and priorities changed overnight.
Managers ​swallowed the fish​ by transforming the organisation, announcing their goals
very clearly and committing to a firm timeline. They were open about these changes
and over-communicated them to customers, employees and investors. “The louder and
more publicly aggressive companies seem to be about their pivot, the better chance
their stock price has of weathering the transition period,”31 says Tzuo.

The transition period could feel pretty lonely for newspaper managers who dare to
jump. Journalists hate losing a portion of their audience. Commercial departments feel
threatened by what they often perceived as a power grab. Many people won’t accept the
new model before seeing the first positive results.

Chris Duncan, managing director of The Times, learned this lesson after the newspaper
launched its paywall in July 2010.32 “The initial reaction from the journalists was:
‘You’ll kill us all. We’re going to lose our voice, our reach.’ I still remember the night
we pressed the button and we resigned millions of customers effectively. And there was




29
     T. Tzuo, ​Subscribed: Why the subscription model will be your company's future - and what to do about
it,​ Portfolio Penguin, 2018, p. 85.
30
     “How Adobe Became a Successful $95 Billion SaaS Company”, ​Product Habits Blog​. Retrieved on July
28, 2019 on ​https://producthabits.com/adobe-95-billion-saas-company/
31
     T. Tzuo, ​Subscribed: Why the subscription model will be your company's future - and what to do about
it,​ Portfolio Penguin, 2018, p. 86.
32
     L. Oliver, “Times and Sunday Times paywall to go up tomorrow”, ​Journalism.co.uk,​ July 1, 2010.
Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.journalism.co.uk/news/times-and-sunday-times-paywall-to-go-up-tomorrow/s2/a539431/


                                                                                                       27
a moment I remember very clearly because it still makes me feel sick. I looked around
the room and asked: ‘How many subscribers did we get?’ And someone said: ‘None.’”

The newspaper didn’t have much to lose when it introduced a hard paywall in July
2010. ​The company had just lost ​£72m. Traffic was continually increasing, but revenue
was flat. The first pay model charged​ ​£1 for a day and​ ​£2 for a week. Online access was
included in a seven-day print subscription but iPad editions were not. If you wanted
them, you should pay an extra​ ​£9.99 a month.

Chairman Rupert Murdoch was convinced a hard paywall was the way to go. Others in
the company were not so sure. “There was a group within the business who believed it
could be done and a group who believed it couldn’t,” says Duncan. “For a year or so I
was relatively persona non grata on the editorial floor. But 18 months in, we made
more money from the pay model than we did from the ad-funded model. So people
started to see this could work.”

In June 2019 The Times and The Sunday Times had grown its subscriber base to a total
of 539,000 people, 304,000 of which were digital-only. “The mood in the newsroom has
shifted,” says Alan Hunter, head of digital at the newspaper. “I would say 95% of our
journalists think it was a good thing.”




                                                                                          28
4. Adapting your value proposition.
Vocento is one of the leading media groups in Spain. It owns national conservative
newspaper ABC and 11 local newspapers, most of which are market leaders in their
regional markets. The most important one is El Correo, the best-selling newspaper in
the Basque Country. Average circulation in 2018 was 57,547 copies, according to
Spanish auditing organisation OJD.33 It was 128,007 copies in 2003.34

El Correo was the first Vocento newspaper to introduce digital subscriptions in 2015.
Print sales and ad revenue were projected to drop. Pursuing viral traffic didn’t make
any sense for a publisher whose most valuable readers were based around two cities:
Vitoria and Bilbao. Managers had boosted revenue through initiatives such as Oferplan
and Local Digital Kit,35 but they needed new revenue streams.

El Correo started with a very simple value proposition: a metered paywall and a few
exclusive articles for subscribers. The price of the subscription was cheap: €4.95 a
month. “Our goal was to retain our leadership online after we launched,” says Fernando
Belzunce, editorial director of local newspapers at the group. They got 4,500
subscribers, then hit a plateau. Page views dropped but advertising revenue didn’t fall
as much as they feared. The most expensive ads were the ones on the home page, and
those were not behind the paywall.

In October 2018 El Correo relaunched its pay model by lowering the number of free
articles and building a more rounded value proposition. The company put more pieces
behind a paywall and marked those pieces as such. Journalists focused on topics that

33
     ​J. Soteras, “Los 10 principales periódicos españoles bajaron en 2018 sus ventas en el quiosco”,
Infolibre,​ January 30, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://www.infolibre.es/noticias/medios/2019/01/30/ninguno_los_principales_periodicos_espanoles_vend
e_quiosco_mas_000_ejemplares_mes_91317_1027.html
34
   ​“‘El Correo Español El Pueblo Vasco’ consigue los mejores resultados de difusión en el último informe
de la OJD”, ​Gaceta de Prensa​, October 22, 2014. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://www.gacetadeprensa.com/noticia/5030/actualidad/el-correo-espanol-el-pueblo-vasco-consigue-los
-mejores-resultados-de-difusion-en-el-ultimo-informe-de-la-ojd.html
35
   Oferplan is a service that saves people money through the use of virtual coupons. Local Digital Kit
offers small companies different services such as advertising, marketing and SEO.


                                                                                                        29
were important for some of their readers such as female sports and local football teams.
They also created a true crime section where local reporters resurfaced content from
the archive and wrote about things that happened in their city a few decades before.
“These sections don’t generate a lot of traffic, but they build loyalty and amplify our
brand,” says Belzunce. “The challenge now is transforming frustration into excitement.
It’s not just about the paywall. Once you are a subscriber, you receive newsletters on
your favourite topics and enjoy discounts from our loyalty club.”

The relaunch worked. In a few months, El Correo signed up thousands of readers and
reached 12,000 subscribers in March 2019. Although they ran ads on local buses, the
main conversion driver was the most valuable journalism they produced. “We are much
happier now because we see that our marketing strategy is working and also because
the new model is helping us transform our newsrooms,” says Belzunce.

After adopting digital subscriptions at El Correo, Vocento launched them in four of its
local newspapers: Diario Vasco (2016), Diario Montañés (2017), Ideal (2018) and La
Rioja (2019). According to Belzunce, they plan to launch subscriptions in the rest in the
next few months. The last ones to adopt subscriptions will be the ones based in very
competitive markets: El Comercio in Asturias and Las Provincias in Valencia. “Right
now we have over 27,000 digital subscribers. I think it’s feasible for us to get to 100,000
subscribers once we are running subscriptions in the 11 local newspapers we own.”

What happened at El Correo is not unusual. Adopting any reader revenue model
requires rethinking your value proposition. And not just in terms of your journalism. A
younger, mostly mobile audience demands a seamless user experience. Publishers need
to adjust their offerings to the needs of their customers. Here are some things news
organisations are doing on this front.


4.1. Focus on your digital product.

Two-thirds of the revenue of Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter still comes from
print. But its leadership decided to focus on the digital presentation as if print didn’t


                                                                                            30
exist. “We make sure every article is published at the right time and in the right format
for the digital audience,” says Martin Jönsson, head of editorial development at the
newspaper. “If your goal is to build digital loyalty, you have to start from digital
quality. That means reviewing your metrics to understand the needs of your readers,
then change into a positive spiral where more quality attracts more subscribers and
gets you more revenue and more journalists.”

In the last four years, Dagens Nyheter has achieved that. “It’s much cheaper to publish
a digital product,” says Jönsson. “You shouldn’t care too much whether revenue comes
from print or digital as long as you can get a profitable business.”

Swedish publishers are in a privileged position: Jönsson says that most of their
customers pay for either music, movies or news, and 13% pay for all three. But there are
many lessons publishers from other countries could draw from their success. After
adopting digital subscriptions, Dagens Nyheter started creating innovative formats
such as VR, podcasts and audiobooks. As a result, they’ve attracted a different
audience: much younger, more female and less urban. While 73% of their print
circulation is sold in Stockholm, 60% of their digital subscribers live in other cities. “We
are reaching new people,” says Jönsson. “So we have to understand how these new
readers define quality and what we can do about that.”

Some of the things Dagens Nyheter has done will sound familiar to other publications.
They’ve expanded their team of investigative reporters and increased the number of
foreign correspondents. They’ve launched a new app with quizzes and crosswords and
published audio versions of all of their long-form stories. This is something Danish
digital newspaper Zetland also did at its members’ request.36 “Today 65% of our usage
comes from audio,” says Lea Korsgaard, Zetland’s co-founder and editor-in-chief.



36
   ​C. Schmidt​, “​Zetland’s members asked for an audio version — and now it’s more popular than their
written stories”, ​Nieman Lab​, May 9, 2018. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.niemanlab.org/2018/05/zetlands-members-asked-for-an-audio-version-and-now-its-more-pop
ular-than-their-written-stories/



                                                                                                   31
“We’re still a written-word publication, but people listen to the written word. We asked
our users and they told us what they wanted.”


4.2. Stop doing stuff (really).

As part of their efforts, journalists at Dagens Nyheter tried to identify the kind of
stories very few people read. “We realised that using copy from AP or Reuters didn’t
work for us. People come to us in search of deep dives, not quick summaries,” says
Jönsson. They cut the number of articles they published by 15%. After doing that, they
managed to increase traffic by making sure they focused on the right stories. Le Monde
and The Guardian have also reduced their output with similar results.

Spanish journalist Ignacio Escolar faced a similar challenge after founding eldiario.es in
2012. His initial model was Politico. He didn’t want to create another general-interest
newspaper but one with a sharp focus on politics and investigations. As its audience
grew, Escolar considered publishing sports news. “We were approached by a group of
journalists who wanted to cover sports for us,” says Escolar, founder and
editor-in-chief of eldiario.es. “We signed an agreement with them but it didn’t go well.
Our paying members complained.” Some of their emails were blunt: “I’m not paying
you guys to know more about the Real Madrid matches.” The sports coverage didn’t
create either substantial ad revenue or new members and eldiario.es dropped the
project. It hasn’t covered sports ever since.


4.3. Create great user experience.

Members don’t see any ads when reading eldiario.es. El Correo’s subscribers aren’t
shown the most invasive ones. Both newspapers have redesigned their digital products
so their paying readers can enjoy a better user experience.




                                                                                        32
News organisations are realising that content is just one of the aspects of their value
proposition. Loading time, packaging and presentation are important too. Younger
audiences are used to the high standards set by digital platforms and are less forgiving.

The Guardian has a two-fold reader revenue strategy. It offers memberships and
one-off contributions for the readers who want to support the work of its journalists.
But it also offers a transactional proposition for people who want to experience its
journalism in unique ways. “Content is free and will always be free,” says Richard
Furness, managing director for consumer revenues and publishing at the newspaper.
“Our subscriptions are about creating an experience that is so compelling that people
will pay.”

The Guardian offers several options: ​several print and digital bundles, ​an ​£11.99
monthly subscription to the iPad edition of the British newspaper and ​a ​£5.99
subscription to a few features of its premium mobile app.37 For this monthly fee you can
customize the home screen, follow your favourite writers and have access to a couple of
exclusive tabs:

     ●   The first one is called ​Live​ and it’s designed for news junkies who want to keep
         up with the news.
     ● The second one is called ​Discover​ and includes a selection of long reads.

“We created these features after doing many tests with our readers,” says Furness.
“Two needs came up time and again: ‘I’ve got two minutes and I want to catch up
quickly with what’s going on’ and ‘I want to read beautifully presented long stories.”
Both tabs are really popular right now.”




37
   ​Subscription bundles, ​The Guardian.​ Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://support.theguardian.com/uk/subscribe?INTCMP=header_support_subscribe&acquisitionData=%7
B%22source%22%3A%22GUARDIAN_WEB%22%2C%22componentType%22%3A%22ACQUISITIONS
_HEADER%22%2C%22componentId%22%3A%22header_support_subscribe%22%2C%22referrerPage
viewId%22%3A%22jwugtx3iyjycma7ygt5y%22%2C%22referrerUrl%22%3A%22https%3A%2F%2Fwww.t
heguardian.com%2Fuk%22%7D



                                                                                            33
Not every reader demands the same user experience. Around 22,000 subscribers of El
Mundo pay to read the PDF version of the next day’s print edition before going to sleep.
PDFs are old-fashioned but are still popular among older audiences. These readers can
be a great asset as El Mundo launches a more comprehensive subscription model. La
Vanguardia and Ara report similar behaviour. The print edition is still perceived as
something valuable by a significant portion of the audience even though some of its
pieces are already available online.


4.4. Build products your readers can finish.

Readers love the sense of achievement that comes from finishing a daily edition. In a
digital environment dominated by endless feeds, finite products are quite appealing.
“Journalists should remember that their job is not publishing as much as they can, but
editing what is important,” says Richard Furness, from The Guardian. In October 2018
Furness helped relaunch Guardian Weekly38 as a glossy magazine with three different
editions: international, North-American and Australian. The magazine has introduced
a younger audience to The Guardian in print. Most of the pieces published in Guardian
Weekly are not commissioned just for the magazine. Its editor is there mostly to edit
down and curate journalism that already exists. The lesson for Furness is clear. “You
should think about the content you produce every day and then do something
interesting with that content and sell it as a subscription product,” he says.

News organisations are betting on the renewed appeal of daily or weekly editions as a
way to recreate the news habits of the past. This trend is behind daily podcasts such as
The Economist’s The Intelligence and The Guardian’s Today in Focus. It’s also what’s
fuelling the rise of newsletters as a way to engage with the audience without depending
on algorithms.




38
  The Guardian Weekly Wikipedia page. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Guardian_Weekly#Since_2007


                                                                                        34
Publishers use newsletters for different purposes. They can be just a tool to bring casual
readers further into the acquisition funnel. They can also enhance the newspaper’s
value proposition by providing value to underserved audiences. A great example is The
Times’s Crime Club newsletter.39 It gives reviews, free ebooks and event tickets to crime
fiction fans. It’s the most successful newsletter at The Times with a 70% open rate. A
big news story can also be a great opportunity for a pop-up newsletter. Catalan
newspaper Ara published a daily email during the trial of 12 separatist leaders over
their role in 2017 Catalonia’s failed independence bid.

The product team at The Economist sees newsletters as an opportunity to maximise
traffic and bring occasional readers closer to the brand. Unlike other news
organisations, they’ve focused on a small number of newsletters rather than to launch
dozens. They may explore a few niches in the future, but any new efforts should be
based on their readers’ needs. The Economist sends two daily newsletters and a weekly
one with the cover and a few pieces of the magazine. According to Denise Law, head of
product at The Economist, newsletters surpassed Twitter as a source of referral traffic
to their website in May 2019. “Readers who use our newsletters are more likely to
become subscribers than those via other channels,”40 she says. “The email with the
Donald Trump cover right after the [2016 presidential] election converted two o three
times more than the average one,” says Sunnie Huang, newsletters editor at the
magazine.

Digital editions come in many flavours. Every week Catalan newspaper Ara publishes a
PDF dossier41 with essays and infographics about a topic. These dossiers could be as
long as 80 pages. Topics are evergreen and wide-ranging, from Marxism to Europe,
obesity and sex. According to Maria Llambí, Ara’s chief marketing officer, dossiers get
downloaded more than 15,000 times a month. Most of their content already exists and


39
   The Times crime club newsletter signup page, ​The Times.​ Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/newsletter-signup-crimeclub-cw8qsvlg2
40
   D. Law, “Focusing on our core digital products”, ​Medium​, June 3, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019
from ​https://medium.com/severe-contest/focusing-on-our-core-digital-products-8dd1d7a80a20
41
   Dossiers published by Catalan newspaper ​Ara​. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from ​https://llibreria.ara.cat/


                                                                                                           35
is repackaged for this new format. Dossiers have their own metered paywall. Only
subscribers have unlimited access. Registered users can download five for free.

Both Le Monde and La Repubblica have experimented with simpler digital products.
Every morning at 7 am, Le Monde publishes a 25-article digital edition to its mobile app
La Matinale.42 Its user interface looks a lot like Tinder. Users are shown the headlines
and swipe left or right depending on their interests. That gives them access to a news
feed with the articles they’ve saved. Some are only accessible to subscribers.

Italian newspaper La Repubblica launched a new digital subscription in July 2018.43 The
subscription is 50% cheaper than the full digital bundle and doesn’t include access to
every article published in print. It offers the 20 most important stories published in
print plus four news analysis and one exclusive long-form piece. It also gives readers
access to audio versions of the articles and three daily newsletters. “At the beginning,
we published every article at midnight, but most readers converted between seven and
nine. So we started to publish new pieces at lunchtime and dinnertime. By doing this,
we got more new subscribers every day,” says former editor-in-chief Mario Calabresi.

When Calabresi left its position in February 2019, more than 40,000 people were paying
for this cheaper subscription, which gives La Repubblica €3 million in annual revenue.
According to Calabresi, the newspaper lost around €12 million in 2018 on an annual
budget of €110 million.

In November 2014 The Economist launched Espresso,44 a daily briefing with five pieces,
a quick roundup of the daily news and a smart quotation. According to Lane Greene,
language columnist of The Economist and editor of Espresso, pieces should have
around 155 words and fit in a phone screen. Every article should have a news peg, a

42
   Home page of ​Le Monde’​ s La Matinale. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.lemonde.fr/lamatinale/
43
   “Il mondo Repubblica: ecco la nuova app che gira intorno a te”, ​La Repubblica,​ July 26, 2018. Retrieved
on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.repubblica.it/tecnologia/mobile/2018/07/26/news/repubblica_nuova_app_disponibile_store_a
pple_google_play-202751586/
44
   “Our new daily edition for smartphones”, ​The Economist,​ November 6, 2014. Retrieved on July 28,
2019 from ​https://www.economist.com/newsbook/2014/11/06/our-new-daily-edition-for-smartphones


                                                                                                         36
surprising fact and a takeaway. It should be an opportunity to look at a bigger trend
too.

Espresso has editions for Asia, Europe and the Americas and it’s available in the main
app of the magazine. Every subscriber can read it, but it’s also sold as a cheaper,
separate subscription for ​£​2.49/$3.99 a month. 60% of Espresso’s revenue comes from
subscriptions. The rest comes from advertising. It is sent as a newsletter, but most of its
audience read it through The Economist app.


4.5. Rethink what to publish and when.

In March 2016, The Times announced it would stop covering breaking news. Instead of
posting quick updates on developing stories, it would publish three daily editions at 9
am, 12 pm and 5 pm. The management decided after reviewing the data. “The message
[from our readers] was very clear,” says Alan Hunter, head of digital at the newspaper.
“They valued us for our insights, our analysis and the authority of our reporting, not for
the ability to catch up very quickly.”

The Financial Times hasn’t retreated from breaking news, but it’s acting more like a
broadcaster. A few years ago, most of the British newspapers were still publishing the
bulk of their content online around 5 pm. As a result, there was a perfect asymmetry
between when readers were reading and when journalists were publishing. It was bad
for search too. When surfacing news articles, Google takes into account factors such as
home page promotion and freshness of publication. Pieces published in the afternoon
were harder to find.

“This realisation led to a slow, finally successful shift in publication habits,” says Renée
Kaplan, head of audience and new content strategies at the Financial Times. “We had
to reprogram desks and journalists in order to keep on filing after the print deadline.
Now we’ve evolved from a print distribution culture to a broadcast distribution culture,
with pieces published throughout the day. Unlike The Times, though, we don’t publish




                                                                                          37
three e-papers a day. Our home page is very dynamic. We still receive a lot of traffic
from social and search.”


4.6. Less could be more.

“I read The Economist cover-to-cover because its content makes me think critically
about the world,” tweeted45 Bill Gates in July 2018. The statement was a reminder of the
value the weekly magazine provided to many influential readers, but some people at
the newsroom saw it as a mixed blessing. “There’s a whole universe of new subscribers
for whom The Economist is an overwhelming experience,” says Denise Law, head of
product at the magazine. “That doesn’t mean we should exclude them. It means that
we might need to do a better job at tailoring to them.”

These readers find it hard to get through the magazine each week. When old issues
start piling up on their coffee table, they start feeling guilty about not being able to get
through it. Law calls this “the New Yorker effect” and it’s one of the main reasons
people cancel their subscription to the magazine.46

The Economist’s new app tries to solve this problem by integrating Espresso and giving
the reader a few daily picks. “The whole point of the daily picks is saying: ‘Here are the
seven most important things you need to read today. We're not going to make it like a
never-ending Facebook feed where you keep going and you see more posts. We pride
ourselves on being the trusted filter on the world. And filter is a really important word.
You come to us because you trust our judgment,” says Law.

The Economist’s strategy makes an important point. The product you sell offline could
be overwhelming or useless for a digital audience. The most successful news




45
   Tweet from Bill Gates. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://twitter.com/billgates/status/1022712786449846272?lang=en
46
   L. Southern, “​Newsletters as puzzle pieces’: How The Economist uses email to reduce subscriber
churn”,​ ​Digiday​, July 5, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://digiday.com/media/economist-takes-less-approach-newsletters/


                                                                                                     38
organisations think thoroughly about packaging and presentation and invest their
limited resources on the platforms that are popular among their most loyal audiences.


4.7. Cherish your brand.

Many newspapers still treat their digital products as separate brands. They fill their
websites with second-rate articles and publish their best articles just in print. However,
audiences don’t distinguish a printed newspaper from its digital products or its social
media feeds. In a world increasingly fragmented, the values of a brand should be
present in everything it does.

“If we sell oranges through [our service] Oferplan,47 it’s because our readers trust our
brand. You can’t do an event on the new developments in science if you have a website
full of clickbait,” says Fernando Belzunce from Spanish media group Vocento. Denise
Law, from The Economist, shares a similar view: “Every single piece of journalism we
do, regardless of the platform, needs to be done to a high standard.”

As part of their subscription strategies, some newspapers attach their brands to
particular values. Spanish conservative newspaper La Razón creates content related to
five values: diversity, the environment, the traditional family, the fight for the rights of
people with disabilities, and the unity of Spain. “Selling content is very difficult. So
most of our campaigns are associated with those values,” says Sergio Rodríguez, head
of digital at the newspaper. La Razón launched digital subscriptions in October 2018. It
had signed up around 1,000 subscribers in March 2019.

Journalists at eldiario.es tried something similar in 2015. As European migration crisis
unfolded, they asked their readers for money to ramp up their coverage. They created a
landing page and launched a specific campaign. It didn’t work.




47
  What is Oferplan, Vocento. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.vocento.com/nosotros/digital/oferplan/


                                                                                           39
Other efforts have been more successful. ​eldiario.es faced a difficult moment during the
Catalan crisis in October 2017. “In the first few months, many people cancelled their
membership,” says Escolar. “Some thought we were too supportive of the
pro-independence movement. Others thought we were too much against it. Many
organisations on the left faced a similar challenge.” Escolar and his colleagues
managed to change this atmosphere by creating “A call for a dialogue”,48 a section
where intellectuals, journalists and politicians wrote short pieces calling for building
bridges between Catalonia and the rest of Spain. “This project got us hundreds of new
members and strengthened our position as an independent voice at a moment where
most newspapers were hugely polarized,” Escolar says.

A physical object can strengthen the connection of a newspaper with its audience. In
2018, eldiario.es printed 300 copies of a drawing by award-winning Spanish illustrator
Ana Juan.49 It sold most of them to raise money for a non-profit fighting violence
against women. The rest were given as a present to the most loyal female members of
the newspaper.




48
   “Una llamada colectiva al diálogo”, ​eldiario.es,​ October 5, 2017. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.eldiario.es/politica/Voces-dialogo_0_693980656.html
49
   “eldiario.es y Ana Juan, comprometidos contra la violencia de género”, ​eldiario.es,​ July 17, 2018.
Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.eldiario.es/redaccion/eldiarioes-Ana-Juan-comprometidos-violencia_6_793780624.html


                                                                                                          40
5. Designing the best pricing.
Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter had almost no digital subscribers in 2015. Four
years later, the newspaper has reached a few milestones. It had 165,000 digital
subscribers and 163,000 print subscribers. The total number was higher than it has
been at any point since the early 2000s. Revenue from digital subscriptions was higher
than revenue from digital ads. According to Digiday,50 the newspaper was converting
around 2,000 subscribers a week.

Dagens Nyheter’s executives adopted this reader revenue strategy when they realised
the ad revenue was flowing away from newspapers into technology platforms. Ramping
up digital subscriptions was the only real alternative to raising prices and cutting jobs.
“Cutting costs made you turn into a negative spiral,” says Jönsson. With fewer
journalists, they would offer lower quality and it would be impossible to charge more.

Dagens Nyheter reimagined its value proposition, reduced friction on the payment
process and improved the user experience of its digital products. Then it implemented
a complex pay model with three different elements:

     ● Everyone can read three articles a week before hitting a metered paywall. This
        metered paywall accounts for 10% of conversions.
     ● Some premium articles are always behind the paywall. These pieces are usually
        quality lifestyle content: articles related to science, health, relationships, family,
        work and children. These pieces represent 35% of conversions.
     ● Around 55% of conversions come from articles that are free for a few hours and
        are only put behind a paywall after going viral. An algorithm detects these
        articles but an editor decides which ones to make available just for subscribers
        and when.


50
  L. Southern, “How Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter halved subscriber churn in 2 years”, ​Digiday​,
May 20, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://digiday.com/media/how-swedish-newspaper-dagens-nyheter-halved-churn-to-8-in-2-years/



                                                                                                   41
“We want our best and most popular content to be subscribers-only, but we need it to
be open for a while to get new readers into the funnel,” says Jönsson.

As my colleague Michael Leitner explained in a recent paper,51 many European news
outlets are adopting dynamic paywalls in different flavours. As Dagens Nyheter,
Swedish newspaper Svenska Dagbladet puts some of its articles behind the paywall
after they reach a huge audience. Swiss newspaper NZZ adapts the meter threshold
dynamically to the user’s propensity to subscribe. Users with a low propensity score get
access to more articles and high-scored users quickly reach a lower threshold.

This trend reflects an important change in the industry. As Robert G. Picard wrote in
2014, “news service providers are relating to consumers differently than in the past and
employing pricing models that differ from those of the original print and broadcast
products. Many offer varying prices for access to different bundles of platforms and for
different levels of access to premium and specialized news content. No longer is all
content provided to all consumers at the same price.”52

When making complex decisions about pricing, media executives should be aware of
what economists call reference price, “an internal standard against which observed
prices are compared.53 There is wide evidence that consumers use reference prices in
making their choices. These reference prices come from past prices but also from the
prices of other products and services, especially in the digital space. The monthly price
of Netflix or Spotify could affect what a newspaper can charge for its digital
subscriptions, especially in the Nordic countries, where the penetration of these
services is very high. “People here in Sweden have learnt that you have to pay for your




51
   M. Leitner, ​How media companies use data to sign up digital subscribers (and keep them),​ Reuters
Institute, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2019-05/How_media_companies_use_data.pdf
52
   R. Picard, “Twilight or new dawn of journalism? Evidence from the changing news ecosystem”,
Journalism Studies​ vol. 15, no. 5, 2014, pp. 500-510.
53
   G. ​Kalyanaram and R. S. Winer. “Empirical Generalizations from Reference Price Research”, ​Marketing
Science​, vol. 14, no. 3, 1995, pp. G161–G169. ​www.jstor.org/stable/184158


                                                                                                     42
content,” says Jönsson. “They pay for their music, their movies and their newspaper,
and they cost about €10 each.”

This chapter will deal with pricing, free trials and content bundles. Here are some of
the things news organisations are trying right now in this field.


5.1. Ensure your pricing is aligned with your values.

Pricing is especially tough for newspapers with a less transactional value proposition.
How much should you charge for what is mostly a recurring donation with a few
additional perks? At Spanish newspaper eldiario.es they started in 2012 with a couple
of options: an annual membership for €60 and a biannual one for €30. Around 10% of
members pay more than that on their own volition. They are called patrons and are
identified as such when posting comments on the site.

In February 2019, eldiario.es dropped the biannual membership and introduced a
monthly one for €7. This higher price doesn’t include receiving a copy of the quarterly
magazine eldiario.es sends to its annual members. Raising prices was less important
than responding to the needs of the audience. “The reason behind this was making it
easier for our readers to dip in and out of the membership,” says Esther Alonso, head of
marketing at the newspaper. “Many had asked us for this option and it’s almost an
industry standard.”

After introducing the monthly membership, Alonso noticed a change in consumer
behaviour. Before February 2019, around 50% of the new members took the annual
option, 40% the biannual one. The rest took other offerings. After February, 77% of the
new members sign up for the annual subscription and only 17% take the new monthly
option. “I would say the monthly option is attracting people who wouldn’t join
otherwise,” says Alonso. “It’s still possible monthly memberships are cannibalizing
some annual ones. But the fact that they only amount to 17% of new signups makes us




                                                                                         43
think our members are usually loyal readers who prefer a longer option to a shorter
one.”

After growing its member base for the last seven years, eldiario.es has started to hit a
plateau. The newspaper had around 35,000 in January 2020. Churn is extremely low,
but it is more difficult to keep growing every month. As every Spanish newspaper is
preparing to adopt digital subscriptions, executives are considering a few changes.
Their messaging has always made two points to their readers: they should become
members to keep information free and to protect editorial independence. Should they
drop the first point and introduce a paywall?

As a response to the new environment, eldiario.es is preparing a slightly different
membership model. After reading a number of articles, the reader will hit a metered
paywall and will be shown the monthly and the annual price. If she can’t afford to pay
€7 a month, she will be invited to explain why and to give anything from nothing to €6
a month. Those members will have access to the eldiario.es but won’t have other
advantages such as receiving the quarterly magazine. The ultimate goal of this move is
to keep growing without losing unique users. Around 350,000 users of eldiario.es read
more than 15 articles a month. Those are the ones eldiario.es would like to convert.

"Introducing a traditional paywall would’ve meant not just going against one of our
editorial principles but also against one of the strengths of our business model,” says
María Ramírez, head of strategy at eldiario.es. “At the same time, it was essential to do
something new to get new members in a more competitive environment as more
newspapers in Spain are turning to subscriptions. In the end, we’ve found a balance
between pushing strongly for readers' support and keeping the information free for
those who can't afford it."


5.2. Experiment in every way you can.

Spanish media group Vocento owns 11 local newspapers. Five run digital subscriptions
at the monthly price of €4.95. When launching subscriptions in the sixth one, El Norte


                                                                                           44
de Castilla, Vocento tried a higher monthly price: €5.95.54 “If it goes well, we could
raise prices in the other newspapers too,” says Fernando Belzunce, editorial director of
local newspapers at the group, who suggest a changing media environment could create
some kind of reference price. “It would be great for us if El País charges €15 a month for
its digital subscriptions. Then we could charge a similar price.”

Speaking in 2019 at the Oxford Media Convention, Mark Thompson, said that younger
readers were his main concerns as CEO of The New York Times Company. “The biggest
existential threat to legacy newspapers is losing the audiences under 40,” he said.55 The
New York Times has addressed this strategic problem in different ways. It has created
The Daily, a podcast that has introduced many younger readers to its best journalism. It
has also invited readers to give between $10 and $2,000 to sponsor student
subscriptions. The newspaper promises to match every one of them. As Joshua Benton
wrote, the programme has sponsored more than 3 million student subscriptions and
generates around $10 million for The New York Times.56

The Financial Times offers half-price subscriptions to every college student in the
United Kingdom and free subscriptions57 to students of secondary schools around the
world.58 Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter offered every reader under 25 a free
subscription during the general election without asking for a credit card. The day after
the election, they asked them if they wanted to pay. A lot of them stayed on.

British news startup Tortoise has created the so-called Tortoise Network, a scheme to
reach the people who are hardest for news organisations to reach but whose voices they

54
    ​Subscription pricing of El Norte de Castilla. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://areapersonal.elnortedecastilla.es/suscripcion/#vca=suscribete&vso=elnortedecastilla&vmc=on&vli
=cabecera
55
    Tweet retrieved on July 28, 2019 from ​https://twitter.com/eduardosuarez/status/1107594978891624448
56
     ​J. Benton, “​ ​Want to see what one digital future for newspapers looks like? Look at The Guardian, which
isn’t losing money anymore”, ​Nieman Lab,​ May 1, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.niemanlab.org/2019/05/want-to-see-what-one-digital-future-for-newspapers-looks-like-look-at
-the-guardian-which-isnt-losing-money-anymore/
57
   “ Financial Times Student discount”, ​Financial Times​. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://www.nus.org.uk/en/nus-extra/discounts/financial-times-student-discount/
58
    “FT Secondary Schools”, ​Financial Times.​ Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://www.ft.com/ft-secondary-schools


                                                                                                            45
most need to hear. The newsroom monitors the demographic and attitudinal profile of
their membership base to spot the ones underrepresented. Tortoise works with
nonprofits and charities to reach out to those kinds of people, then give them a
membership funded by several sponsors. The Tortoise Network opened with over
3,5000 memberships in June 2019.


5.3. Create attractive bundles.

Dagens Nyheter offers a few bundles with its digital subscription. One includes its
crosswords app. Others include subscriptions to The New York Times, a local
newspaper or an audiobook company. “We don’t see this as an earnings opportunity
but as an anti-churn opportunity. It’s a way to build loyalty by adding great products to
our brand,” says Martin Jönsson, head of editorial development at the newspaper.

At eldiario.es they’ve created bundled subscriptions with sister publications such as
satirical magazine Mongolia and environmental magazine Ballena Blanca. Instead of
paying €60 a year to be members of eldiario.es, readers can add a membership to any of
those outlets by paying €80. As part of its new pay model, eldiario.es has created
similar bundles with 14 local news sites it partners with. Every reader can support their
work by paying €20 euros more.


5.4. Don’t focus on print but use it to your advantage.

Print is not a priority for the main legacy news organizations in Spain or the United
Kingdom. This doesn’t mean people who are responsible for reader revenue don’t care
about print. Most of them are trying to manage decline through cutting costs and
raising prices. Others are using print to their advantage in different ways.

The Guardian launched its first print subscription offerings in 2008. Today they
represent 45% of their print sales on weekdays and 20% on weekends. “We’ve used
price hikes to convert anonymous buyers into known subscribers,” says Richard
Furness, managing director for consumer revenues and publishing at the newspaper.


                                                                                        46
“We announce our decision, then say: ‘If you subscribe, you won’t pay full price.’” The
Guardian never does any retail promotion without including a clear ask for a
subscription.

When launching its paywall in 2010, The Times gave digital for free to its print
subscribers. “It was a nice way to get some people in because on day one we had no
audience,” says Chris Duncan, managing director at the newspaper. “Today print plus
digital are the ultimate buyers but digital-only is where our growth comes from. If we
grew 55,000 last year, digital-only grew by 52,000. Print is relatively stable. We’re not
signing up a lot of seven-day print subscribers. And it’s not easy to sell digital plus the
printed edition of The Sunday Times.”

Many media executives will recognise themselves in the dilemmas expressed by Maria
Llambí, chief marketing officer at Catalan newspaper Ara. A seven-day print
subscription costs €400 a year. A digital one costs only €100. Print subscriptions have a
higher margin because the price is higher and print ads are more expensive. People who
subscribe to print stay for longer too.

Ara has around 45,000 subscribers. 60% are digital-only and 40% come from print. “It’s
much easier for us to acquire digital subscribers. They account for 80% of the people we
sign up. They also churn at a higher rate. Once they’re with us, we try to upgrade them
at least to the weekend print bundle,” says Llambí.


5.5. Different tiers require different strategies.

The Financial Times introduced a metered paywall in 2007. The number of free articles
a non-subscriber could read started at 30 and shrank very quickly over time. In 2015 the
newspaper switched to paid trials as its primary acquisition model. Readers get access
to most of its content for four weeks for a small sum. Digital subscriptions now account




                                                                                            47
for more than three-quarters of the FT’s circulation. Around 70% of its readers live
outside the United Kingdom.59

Today the newspaper offers two different digital subscriptions: standard and premium.
Premium is twice as expensive as standard and includes extra benefits such as access to
the Lex Column, special in-depth analysis and a digital replica of the daily newspaper.
Standard subscribers can share up to 10 articles a month with family, friends and
colleagues. Premium subscribers can share up to 20.

Premium subscribers are richer and skew towards finance. They are often more senior
and read less content than standard subscribers. They only read what they need to read.
The vast majority of the FT’s business subscriptions are premium subscriptions.
Standard gets the bulk of consumer sales.

Premium subscriptions are never sold at a discount. “We do apply discounts on
standard subscriptions,” says Marie Goddard, director of customer marketing at the
newspaper. “If we get someone on a discount, we slowly increase her price over her
subscription tenure. We play around with the levers at the entry-level so our audience
can understand what it means to subscribe to the FT.”

“Selling standard in the context of premium is very hard because it’s not everything but
it’s still very good,” says ​Daisy Donald, head of customer experience research at the
newspaper​. “We’ve tried to articulate this in different ways throughout the year. Now
we’ve landed on standard giving you breadth and premium giving you extra depth
within smaller verticals.” When selling premium subscriptions, the newspaper
mentions emerging markets, mergers and acquisitions, investing and trade as those
verticals.

On the other side of the spectrum are the so-called trialists, readers who sample the FT
through discounts. The Financial Times offers a four-week paid trial for a small amount


59
  “FT tops one million paying readers”, ​Financial Times,​ April 1, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://aboutus.ft.com/en-gb/announcements/ft-tops-one-million-paying-readers/


                                                                                                            48
of money​. “We did a lot of experiments before making a decision,” says Donald. “It was
5 pounds versus 1 pound versus free, free with no credit card details versus free with
credit card details. One pound with credit card details is where we landed. It was the
data that informed our decision on this.”

Should the FT offer an even cheaper subscription? And if so, what would it look like?
This is a conversation that keeps circling back in the newspaper. There are at least two
problems with creating this kind of tier: pricing and value proposition. On pricing,
Goddard doesn’t think Netflix and Amazon provide a reference price for the FT’s
customer base. “Our challenge is that we’re now in this bucket of subscriptions with
Netflix, Spotify and all the rest. So we need to make sure people always see the value
we offer compared to so much Netflix they don’t watch.”

A cheaper tier would require crafting the right value proposition. “There are a lot of
misconceptions around the Financial Times. People don’t realise it’s actually about the
global economy and global affairs,” says Renée Kaplan, head of audience and new
content strategies at the newspaper. “But the biggest blocking point after recognition is
price because our subscriptions are expensive. The question is what you put on this
cheaper tier. It has to be some representation of the full product because the whole
point of this kind of product would be eventually upselling you. It should be sort of a
gateway in.”




                                                                                          49
6. Creating an acquisition strategy.
Ignacio Escolar launched digital newspaper eldiario.es along with other Spanish
colleagues in September 2012. Escolar was a high-profile journalist. He often appeared
as a pundit in a few radio and television programmes. He had been the founding
editor-in-chief of left-wing newspaper Público from 2007 to 2009.

After being ousted as editor-in-chief, Escolar started to think about founding a new
outlet. First, he envisioned a newsroom with around 30 journalists and a business
model entirely based on advertising. Then he thought it was better to start small. “I
came from Público’s failure and one of my partners came from [Spanish newspaper]
ADN’s failure. Neither of us wanted to fail again,” he says.

The project started with nine journalists and three extra employees. While preparing to
launch, something extraordinary happened. After Público closed down, some of its
journalists started a crowdfunding campaign to buy the newspaper from its millionaire
owner.60 They failed, but they raised more than 30,000 euros. At the same time, five
journalists from the same newspaper created another digital outlet called Infolibre in
association with French news startup Mediapart.

“I started to think many readers felt guilty of allowing their newspaper to go bankrupt
and were ready to pay,” says Escolar. “We discussed different models and we landed on
something no one had tried before. We would send an email with a few articles every
evening. Those articles would be behind a paywall for a few hours. Non-members would
be able to read them after 6.30am.” A few months later, they added two additional
benefits for members: a quarterly magazine and the chance to read the website with no
ads. They thought of different names for their supporters. “We considered calling them
friends, patrons or subscribers. In the end, we called them members [“socios” in
Spanish] because eldiario.es was 80% Greenpeace and 20% cable TV.”


60
  Más Público’s crowdfunding campaign. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.verkami.com/projects/1736-maspublicoorg


                                                                                         50
Escolar and his partners envisioned a mixed business model with two revenue streams:
advertising and memberships. “I didn’t want to depend entirely on advertising,” he
says. “I wanted to create a combative newspaper. I didn’t want any of the big
companies to be able to control it or shut it down.”

Three months after its launch, eldiario.es reported a small €5,094 loss61 with €214,229
in revenue. At this point, 57% of this figure came from its members. As eldiario.es
grew, advertising became the largest revenue stream. It accounted for 63% of the
revenue in 2018. This percentage has been very stable for most of its history.

Memberships have grown very fast. In March 2013, eldiario.es reported 3,485 members.
It reached 10,000 members in a couple of years.62 In June 2019 eldiario.es had 34,048.
Memberships represented 32% of its revenue in 2018.

Messaging and marketing tactics have been important to reach this number. But
journalism is the real reason why eldiario.es has grown so fast in such a small time.
Every time eldiario.es has published a big investigation, it’s got hundreds if not
thousands of new members. It happened when it published how the board members of
a Spanish public bank spent millions through credit cards that did not show up on any
document.63 It happened again when Escolar was kicked out of a radio station owned by
a powerful media group for publishing that the name of its CEO’s wife was on the
Panamá Papers64 and also when eldiario.es unveiled 25 years of secret contracts signed




61
   I. Escolar, “Las cuentas de eldiario.es”, ​eldiario.es​, March 5, 2013. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.eldiario.es/escolar/cuentas-eldiarioes_6_107849233.html
62
   “Ya somos 10.000 socios y socias”, ​eldiario.es​. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.eldiario.es/10000socios/
63
   P. Águeda, “Qué son las tarjetas 'black' y por qué no son solo unos gastos llamativos”, ​eldiario.es,​
October 10, 2014. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.eldiario.es/gastos_tarjetas_black/tarjetas-black_0_312169291.html
64
   I. Escolar, “Por qué Cebrián me despide de la Ser”, ​eldiario.es,​ April 27, 2016. Retrieved on July 29,
2019 from ​https://www.eldiario.es/escolar/Juan-Luis-Cebrian-despide_6_509959001.html


                                                                                                              51
by the state-owned railway company, a building group and one of the biggest Spanish
banks.65

No scoop brought more new members than the one eldiario.es published on March 21,
2018. It revealed Cristina Cifuentes, the president of the Madrid region and a leading
conservative politician, had fraudulently obtained a master’s degree from a public
university.66 For five weeks, Cifuentes denied the facts and sued the journalists who
published the story. She resigned on April 25, 2018.

From the day it published the Cifuentes’ scoop to her resignation, eldiario.es signed up
more than 8,400 new members. As a result, reader revenue grew from €1.3 million to €2
million in a single year. The newspaper made a profit of €394,458 in 2018. It used this
money to pay a dividend, raise salaries and hire more journalists.

Today eldiario.es has 89 full-time employees67 and an annual revenue of €6.5 million.
There is not a single digital-only news organisation that is either more used or more
trusted in Spain, according to 2019 Digital News Report.68 Competing with larger
newspapers is hard, but Escolar thinks eldiario.es has a competitive advantage: “The
annual budget of [Spanish newspaper] El País is 30 times bigger than ours. In terms of
influence, though, the difference is much smaller. So we are much more efficient than
them and at some point, we’ll overtake them.”

As most Spanish newspapers prepare for digital subscriptions, Escolar, who owns 41%
of eldiario.es, thinks the newspaper will benefit from the new environment: “Soon
everyone will be measured by its members or its subscribers, not by its unique users. By




65
   F. Caballero, “eldiario.es revela 25 años de contratos secretos de la Operación Chamartín entre
Fomento, BBVA y San José”, ​eldiario.es​, January 23, 2019. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.eldiario.es/madrid/papeles-Operacion-Chamartin_0_859164476.html
66
   “El caso Master”, ​eldiario.es,​ March 2019. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://l.eldiario.es/el-caso-master/
67
   Another 54​ people work for the 14 regional editions of the newspaper.
68
   S. Negredo, A. Vara, A. Amoedo y E. Moreno, “Spain”, ​Digital News Report​, June 13, 2019. Retrieved
on July 29, 2019 from ​http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2019/spain-2019/


                                                                                                      52
this measure, eldiario.es could be second or third and that’s great. We have the right
model and a strong community behind us.”

According to internal data, around 70% of the members of eldiario.es are men. The
average member is around 50 and comes from the upper-middle class. Esther Alonso,
head of marketing​ at the newspaper, says they never offer discounts or free trials as
part of their acquisition strategy. Sometimes they use books or old magazines to attract
new members. But the daily email they send in the evening with their best stories is
still their main acquisition tool. ​From May to December 2018, eldiario.es got an average
of 239 new members every week.

Investigative journalism is a great acquisition tool for many news outlets, but it’s not
the only one. Here are other strategies newspapers are using to get readers to subscribe.


6.1. Asking for money? Consider where and how.

Messaging is extremely important for news organisations that rely on the generosity of
their readers. As their value proposition is less transactional, they need to articulate
the reasons why anyone should join. The Guardian has refined its pitch in the last few
years through constant experimentation and with its readers’ help. “We learnt that a
message shouldn’t be a slogan but an explanation of what we’re trying to do, and why
and how this is part of it,” says Amanda Michel, global director and senior product
manager for contributions at the newspaper.

The Guardian doesn’t use any banners or pop-up windows. It asks for their readers’
help with a big paragraph at the end of every article. The pitch is built by answering
some of the questions their readers ask about the membership programme. “A longer
pitch is better than a short one because it answers more questions,” says Michel. “We
imagine these pitches as small conversations. If you were talking to someone in person,
which kinds of questions would you ask about this?”




                                                                                           53
As we explained in Chapter 3, learning to tell your own story is an essential part of this
effort. Especially when you’re trying to reach a global audience, as The Guardian does.
The newspaper has received contributions from more than 170 countries. Around 70%
of its reader revenue comes from outside the United Kingdom.

Different countries often require different strategies. In the United States, people
prefer to make one-off contributions. Some aren’t even regular readers. They give
money after reading a piece they loved. “These people may give multiple times during
the year, but they have no interest in a recurring relationship,” says Michel. “Some are
freelancers and their income is unpredictable. Others just enjoy giving, and the idea of
having money withdrawn from their account takes away the pleasure of doing it.” At
The Guardian, they’ve encouraged these occasional contributions by creating ambitious
editorial projects such as “This land is your land”,69 which examines the threats to
public lands in the United States.

These projects wouldn’t be possible without the work of cross-disciplinary teams, with
people from marketing, editorial, technology and user experience collaborating to
reach the same goal. “You have to develop self-awareness and understand how it is that
your readers see you, what they value about your work and in what ways you’re serving
them and in what ways you’re not,” says Michel. This self-awareness has made The
Guardian (and eldiario.es) create more specific messages, focusing on a few editorial
obsessions such as immigration, child poverty and climate change.

Unlike eldiario.es, The Guardian also sells more transactional subscriptions to its print
products and some of the features of its premium app. This creates an interesting
strategic dilemma. Which kind of offer should they show their readers when they get to
their home page? “We have a limited amount of space and it’s important to put the
right package in front of the right people,” says Richard Furness, managing director for
consumer revenues and publishing at the newspaper. “If you’re a first time user, you

69
  “This land is your land”, ​The Guardian,​ January 29, 2018. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/jan/29/this-land-is-your-land-series-the-guardian



                                                                                                 54
shouldn’t see a commercial proposition. In your third visit, maybe you should see an
ask for a contribution. Then you should see a subscription. Then, an offer to buy a
holiday from us or a call to join our dating site. We are defining this customer journey.
And we can do that because we stopped the infighting between departments.”


6.2. Target specific topics and audiences.

In the last couple of years, Renée Kaplan and her audience team at the Financial Times
realised that articles about the big consulting companies attracted a younger audience.
Most of these readers were based in Asia. They read the FT through Facebook on their
mobile phones. After noticing this, they started producing more content about this
topic and focused their social promotion strategy around this group.

Brexit is one of the topics the FT has focused on in the last few years. In June 2016, it
dropped its paywall for 24 hours on the eve of the vote. As a result, it saw a 600% surge
in digital subscription sales over the next weekend.70 This was hailed as a success at the
time, but some of these subscribers didn’t stay for long. “The problem with discounts
hanging around key events is that you get a lot of people who have no intention to
stay,” says Marie Goddard, head of customer marketing. “It’s great to remind people we
are not just a financial news site. However, many of these people cancel after one year.
So it’s not a stable model for us.”

Brexit created another puzzle for the FT marketing team: a significant volume of their
B2C subscribers consume mostly Brexit news. So it’s important to lead them to other
areas of coverage so they can have a sense of the depth and breadth of the FT. “If you
look at someone like [columnist] Robert Shrimsley, he writes about Brexit but he also
writes about his dogs. And it’s not always easy to discover that kind of content. So
we’re looking at ways we can lead people into other reading points,” Goddard says.



70
  J. Davis, “How the FT drove digital subscriptions sales by 600 percent over Brexit weekend”, ​Digiday​,
June 29, 2016. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://digiday.com/uk/ft-drove-digital-subscriptions-sales-600-percent-brexit-weekend/


                                                                                                        55
6.3. How to use social media.

Half of progressive Americans have never heard of The Economist, according to
internal research. VMany still think it only covers economics and finance. The role of
the magazine’s social media accounts is raising awareness about The Economist and
dispel this myth. The FT has a similar problem: many potential readers have
misconceptions about its brand. The newspaper has a first click-free model: anyone
coming through social can click through once a day on one piece of content on every
single social platform. If they come through Google, they can click a couple of times a
day. Their audio and video content is also free. In a company with such a tight paywall,
social offers a rare opportunity to create some kind of sampling.

Instagram is the hottest platform for the FT right now. Its main account has grown
110% in the last year. This growth has been fuelled by an audience that is very young,
very female and mostly American. “Instagram is not optimised for click-through, but it
generates a lot of engagement around news, fashion and charts,” says Renée Kaplan,
head of audience and new content strategies at the newspaper.

When explaining the FT’s approach to social media, Marie Goddard, head of customer
marketing, uses the metaphor of a luxury brand: “Big fashion houses have cheaper
products like keyrings or little wallets, and people will buy those if they don’t have a lot
of money to feel associated with the brand. And then, when they’re ready, they can
stare up to where the real value and the real content is. I think Instagram is like that for
the FT. For some people, it’s a way to start an association with our brand when they’re
in their twenties with the idea that in the future they’ll become subscribers. Every
publisher is still understanding how this works.”


6.4. Use registration for acquisition (or maybe not).

Spanish newspapers such as ABC, El País, El Confidencial and La Vanguardia are
making people give their email address to read a portion of their content. They see this



                                                                                         56
as a first step before introducing a pay model. El País, ABC and El Confidencial apply
this rule to a few premium articles. La Vanguardia applies the logic of the metered
paywall: it makes people sign up after reading a number of pieces a month. “We
decided to implement this after talking to the guys at [Argentinian newspaper] Clarín,”
says Javier Martínez, director of audiences and digital strategy at La Vanguardia. “They
made thousands of people sign up before launching a paywall. It was a way to start
exploring a pay model without losing advertising revenue. Their traffic figures were
very similar to ours so we decided to try.”

Spanish newspaper El Mundo considered adopting this model but decided against it. “It
would have been great a couple of years ago,” says Vicente Ruiz, head of digital at the
newspaper. “Once we’ve decided to adopt digital subscriptions, it doesn’t make any
sense to bother our most loyal readers twice.”

Anyone who wants to post a comment at eldiario.es has to leave her email address.
However, people who register to post a comment are not likely to become members.
Around 70% of new members were not registered users before they joined. Registering
to receive a newsletter, being a frequent visitor and engaging with the newspaper in
more than one channel are much better indicators that someone will become a
member. Leaving your email to post a comment is not.

The Times introduced registration as a way to open up a very hard paywall. Anyone
who signs up can read two articles a week. The newspaper planned to finish 2019 with
more than 5 million registered users. “We introduced this to create more sampling
opportunities without angering our subscribers. Most of them are heavy edition readers
so light sampling is not scaring the horses,” says managing director Chris Duncan.

At the FT they removed registered users’ access in 2015 in favour of a one-month paid
trial. “One month allows you to sample what our content is,” says Marie Goddard, head
of customer marketing at the newspaper. “This also makes them understand this is a
paid relationship and not a free offering.” If someone doesn’t convert her trial or




                                                                                         57
decides to cancel, they still allow you some access to keep that relationship going. They
try to keep these readers closer to the FT.


6.5. Reduce friction at every step.

On the advice of a leading venture capitalist, Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter
contacted Klarna, a payment solutions firm, in 2015. At this stage, the newspaper had
almost zero digital-only subscribers. The process of becoming a subscriber was too
complex. There were too many steps to get through. Klarna helped the newspaper
develop a one-click payment process. The customer can subscribe just by sharing the
phone number associated with her bank account. The new system worked. From 2015
to 2017, they saw a net growth of nearly 12% per month.71

Removing friction should be an obsession for every subscription business. In March
2018, Google launched a feature that enables customers to use their Google account
and payment methods to subscribe to their favourite publications across the web.
“Subscribe with Google” has another advantage: if you’ve subscribed to a newspaper
through this feature, Google will highlight relevant articles from that newspaper in
every search you do.72 Setting up the feature requires some engineering work Google
has subsidised in some cases. The company takes a cut from every transaction that gets
through.


6.6. Use the right metrics.

A business model focused on reader revenue requires different metrics. Page views and
unique users are much less important than the number of loyal readers and the time
they spend on your page. Some news organisations have built their proprietary


71
     ​S. Seale, “Dagens Nyheter moves to successful digital subscription model”, ​INMA​ ​Conference Blog​,
December 13, 2017. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.inma.org/blogs/conference/post.cfm/inma-webinar-dagens-nyheter-moves-to-successful-digit
al-subscription-model
72
   J. Albrecht, “Introducing Subscribe with Google”, ​Google Blog,​ March 20, 2018. Retrieved on July 29,
2019 from ​https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/google-news-initiative/introducing-subscribe-google/


                                                                                                             58
analytics tools to track the behaviour of the people who are most likely to subscribe or
contribute. “Page views are mostly irrelevant in a subscription business,” says Renée
Kaplan, from the FT. “Our journalists are keen to understand who is reading their
pieces and where they live.” This is essential for a global newspaper like FT, whose
media executives are increasingly focused on trying to understand and target specific
regions.

These are the reasons why the FT created Lantern, an analytics dashboard that
highlights the things that are relevant to their business model and their editorial goals.
Lantern is used every day by more than 200 FT employees. It is meant to be a tactical
tool. For every story, you can see how much time people spend reading it, how many
comments it’s generated and which percentage of visitors come from social and search.
Lantern shows how many people who read a story are subscribers and how many were
anonymous users. It also tracks quality readers. “It looks at the percentage of readers
who actually clicked through a story and spent enough time on the story to actually
read at least half of it,” says Kaplan. This figure, which is adjusted for length, reflects
the number of people who got real value from a piece.

News organisations such as The Wall Street Journal use complex tools to determine
their acquisition strategy. These systems assign every user a so-called propensity score.
This score indicates how likely they are to subscribe. Marketing efforts are personalised
based on propensity scores.73 Spanish newspapers are designing similar tools before
adopting their subscription models. El Mundo measures the value readers get from a
story through several indicators: time spent on page, percentage of loyal users to read
it and how many came from social and search. “Long-form stories, profile articles and
pieces about science are the ones that our readers enjoy the most,” says managing
editor Joaquín Manso. “It’s important to track the stories at the bottom too. If a story




73
  M. Leitner, ​How media companies use data to sign up digital subscribers (and keep them),​ Reuters
Institute, 2019, p. 10-11. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2019-05/How_media_companies_use_data.pdf


                                                                                                      59
gets 400 views after hours on the home page, you have to ask yourself what’s wrong
with it.”




                                                                                     60
7. Fighting churn.
Churn is the biggest existential threat to any subscription business. Getting new
customers is much easier than keeping them after the first few weeks. Retention is
especially hard for any news business. Only a small percentage of the population pays
for a digital subscription in most of the 38 countries covered by the 2019 Digital News
Report.74 Even among the wealthiest, the most educated and the most interested in
news, most people only pay for one subscription to a news site.

Today people subscribe to many digital services: video streaming, music, online gaming
and dating. Asked which one they would keep if forced to keep one, only 12% said they
would keep their subscription to a news site. The percentage is even smaller (7%)
among people under 45. Around 76% of people who currently pay for news would stop
paying if they could only afford one subscription in the next year. This figure is
hypothetical right now. But it could be real if there is an economic downturn in the
next few months.

In such a competitive environment, fighting churn should be a priority from day one.
Keeping your subscribers depends on many of the things we’ve discussed so far.
Designing a seamless user experience is essential. So is cherishing your brand, adopting
the right pricing strategy and creating an attractive value proposition. However, as
John Warrillow explains in ​The Automatic Customer,​ 75 fighting churn also requires
keeping an eye on three important figures:

     ● The monthly recurring revenue (MRR) or the amount of money you get from
        your subscribers every month. If 10 people subscribe to your newspaper for $99 a
        year, your MMR is $82.50 a month.


74
   ​R. Fletcher, “Paying for News and the Limits of Subscription”, ​Digital News Report​, Reuters Institute for
the Study of Journalism, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2019/paying-for-news-and-the-limits-of-subscription/
75
   J. Warrillow, ​The Automatic Customer. Creating a Subscription Business in Any Industry,​ Portfolio
Penguin, 2015.


                                                                                                            61
     ● The average Lifetime Value (LTV) of your customers or the projected revenue
        the average customer will generate during her relationship with your company.
        If the average customer stays for 30 months, it would be $247.50.
     ● The Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC) or the amount of money you spend on
        bringing people in. If you spend $2,000 a month to get 25 new subscribers, your
        CAC would be $80.

Experts warn the average LTV of a subscription company should be at least three times
as big as its CAC. Otherwise, it will be spending its money on getting new customers
who don’t stay for long. Keeping churn low is essential to improve this ratio. As
Warrillow says, “you need to get your churn down to a point where over the life of her
subscription, your average customer is worth at least three times what it costs you to
acquire her.”76 Companies shouldn’t spend too much money on acquisition before
getting churn right.

A company’s churn rate is the percentage of users who cancelled their subscription
within a certain timeframe. For example, an annual churn rate of 10% for a company
with 100 subscribers means that 10 users cancelled their subscriptions within a year.
Marketing teams often look at churn by dividing subscribers in daily, weekly or monthly
cohorts and analyzing cohort retention curves. Those curves show the behaviour of
everyone who joined on date X. Churn often flattens out after a few weeks. The older a
cohort is, the higher its marginal retention. In other words, older subscribers retain
better than newer ones.

According to the Subscription Economy Index Report by Zuora,77 media subscription
businesses had an annual churn rate of 33% in the second half of 2018, the highest
average churn rate among all industries covered by the report. Some of the companies




76
   J. Warrillow, ​The Automatic Customer. Creating a Subscription Business in Any Industry,​ Portfolio
Penguin, 2015, p. 131.
77
   “The Subscription Economy Index”, Zuora. March 2019. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
http://info.zuora.com/rs/602-QGZ-447/images/subscription-economy-index-q4-2018.pdf


                                                                                                         62
covered in this paper declare much lower rates. Most don’t share any figures about its
churn. In the next few pages, I will mention some of the things they’ve done.


7.1. Habits matter more than content.

Churn and acquisition are two sides of the same coin and should be dealt with by a
cross-disciplinary team, with inputs from marketing, engineering and editorial. Churn
is much more important than acquisition. Any small improvement on that front has a
huge impact on the company’s bottom line. “Our data, and data from all over the world,
shows that it is four to five times cheaper to retain an existing user than to acquire a
new one. And while we invest quite a lot right now in acquisition, we still invest much
more in retention and engagement,” said78 Gadi Lahav, head of product at the FT.

Marie Goddard, head of customer marketing at the newspaper, says that embedding
habits in new subscribers is much more useful than showing them articles. “It’s not
about showing them content because content is short-lived,” she says. “It’s about
showing them how to sign up to a newsletter, how to choose the right newsletters or
how to download our mobile app. If you use the app, you are very likely to be engaged
with the FT. So we flipped from content discovery to thinking about the nudges we
need to get them to access our content in their way.”

Fighting inertia is key for every subscription business. One of the biggest reasons why
people cancel any service is the perception that they are paying for something they
don’t use. Your biggest competitor is not a rival service but your customer’s inertia in
not using your service. “For a subscription to stick, customers need to change their
behavior and actually use the service,” says John Warrillow in his book. “You have a
short window to break your customers’ old habits and insert yourself in their daily lives.




78
  B. Veseling, “The road to 1 million subscribers: FT helps users to build 'habit'”, ​WAN-IFRA Blog,​ April
16, 2018. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://blog.wan-ifra.org/2018/04/16/the-road-to-1-million-subscribers-ft-helps-users-to-build-habit


                                                                                                              63
That window is the first few weeks after they have purchased, before the excitement
about what your subscription offers wears off.”79

The FT uses data to examine every reader’s behaviour. Its data scientists have looked at
the day and time she joined, her device and the channel she came from. Then they have
come up with seven different user journeys depending on the relationship they have
with the FT. Some readers only come from social and search. Others get to the articles
through email or a mobile app. This analysis helps the newspaper design new products
and suggest readers different habits that are better for them.

Every subscriber of the FT has an RFV score. RFV is an acronym that reflects the three
most essential metrics for the newspaper: recency, frequency and volume. “We don’t
use page views (...) or time-on-site, which may help other publishers,” says Lahav, who
explains why the RFV score is so important for the newspaper: “If your frequency is
increasing, you are coming more times to the site. If your volume is increasing, the
number of articles that you’re reading is increasing. (...) If your recency is lower,
hopefully it’s zero, which means you came today, your RFV is also higher. It doesn’t
matter what the formula is. What matters is this is a very good proxy for retention.”

At least 83% of the FT’s subscriber base hits their RFV target. But not everyone who
doesn’t is at risk of churning. “The challenge for us is that some of those customers
don’t need to be engaged,” says Goddard. “If you’re a CEO, you might not use your
subscription but you’re not cancelling it either. So we need to be careful when
contacting people who don’t hit their target.” The newspaper doesn’t have an accurate
propensity model to predict which users will churn. Their engagement scores are
useful. But factors like region can influence the audience’s behaviour too.

The Economist doesn’t follow the RFV model. “For us, it’s not about how frequently
you come back or whether you come back every day,” says Denise Law, head of product
at the magazine. “It’s that when you do come, you spend a lot of time with us. So time

79
  J. Warrillow, ​The Automatic Customer. Creating a Subscription Business in Any Industry,​ Portfolio
Penguin, 2015, p. 180.


                                                                                                        64
spent is the single biggest predictor of retention. If Bob comes to The Economist and
stays for five hours once a week, he is more likely to renew his subscription than Sally,
who comes every single day to skim the headlines. So that’s what separates us from our
daily competitors. They’re all about building a daily habit. We are not.”


7.2. Look for churn drivers.

A few years ago, Dagens Nyheter lowered its churn from 25% to 10% with the help of AI
Israeli company ​Spark Beyond80. They created a research engine that identified more
than 200 features that explained churn. With these insights, Dagens Nyheter designed
a churn model that predicted potential churn with 86% accuracy and offered actionable
things they could change to lower it. This model changed the editorial priorities of the
newspaper but also its organisation. The company created a cross-functional team.
This team identifies possible churn drivers every day.

As part of this process, Dagens Nyheter has segmented its readers by different factors
to understand which ones have a high likelihood to churn. For example, if they have a
subscriber who has been recruited from telemarketing and comes from a certain age
group and hasn’t used the website in the last five days, he’s very likely to churn. “There
are two things you can do,” says Martin Jönsson, ​head of editorial development at the
newspaper. “You can stop recruiting people from channels with a high churn rate or
you can try to engage with those people by sending out an email or a push notification,
or by trying to remind them to sign up to newsletters or download the app.”

Micro-segments showed there were acquisition channels that were much more
efficient. They also gave useful insights on pricing, payments, content and device. Two
lessons stood out. The first one is that getting people into loyal means of payment such
as direct debit has a huge impact on churn. The second is that retention is built through
loyalty: churn drops dramatically after the first hundred days.


80
  R. Whitehead and E. J. Wilkinson, “The Media Subscriptions Blueprint”, ​INMA​, April 2018. Retrieved on
July 30, 2019 from ​http://www.dagensmedier.no/globalassets/rapporter/inma_2018digitalsubscriptions.pdf


                                                                                                      65
People who read Dagens Nyheter through its mobile app and those who access its
content from more than one device are much less likely to churn. Those who read
specialized long-form articles are less likely to cancel too. “If you come to us daily and
stay as a subscriber for more than 12 months, your churn rate is around 1.5%,” says
Jönsson. “So we try to create habits to get people used to our digital products. Those
habits can be anything from crosswords to audiobooks, from podcasts to reading a
certain columnist. If you are one of our journalists, we don’t want you to create stories
that get a lot of page views. We want you to create something that builds loyalty and
makes people want to come back. Habits increase our earnings because help us keep
down our acquisition costs.”


7.3. Dirty channels create churn.

Acquisition and churn are two sides of the same coin. If you recruit your subscribers
from the wrong channels, cancellations will go up. Acquisition and churn should be put
under the same organisational umbrella. Otherwise, people who run acquisition will
have the wrong incentives and will bring in customers less likely to stay.

“Engagement sits upstream from acquisition,” says Chris Duncan, managing director of
The Times. “If I run cheap and dirty offers, I’ll get dirty customers and they’ll wash out
the system pretty quickly. But if I’m able to get good quality customers, design an
onboarding experience, get them engaged in the whole realm of the product, then I
have a very high chance of keeping those customers. Our job is to train those habits and
the better we get at this, the faster our business will grow.”


7.4. Watch the 90-day onboarding clock.

John Warrillow mentions in his book what he calls “the 90-day onboarding clock”. The
first three months are the most crucial period for every subscription company. After
this time, it’s much more difficult to get subscribers to use your product. “The stickiest
subscription businesses make it their mission to insert themselves into the daily lives



                                                                                          66
of their customers,” Warrillow says. “If your customers can avoid your product or
service and still get their jobs done, you’ll have much bigger churn than if they need to
interact with your service to complete their daily tasks.”81

Designing an appropriate onboarding process is a powerful weapon in the fight against
churn. After 90 days, over-communication can produce churn. But during the first few
weeks, subscribers are in the mood for knowing more about the service they’re paying
for. “You should think of a new subscriber as a new lover,” says Warrillow. “New lovers
have a thirst to understand you intimately. An older subscriber will find your constant
communication annoying after a while, whereas a new subscriber welcomes your
contacts and takes the time to consume them.”82

Warrillow mentions Blue Dolphin, a venture-backed company headed by Don Nicholas
and set up to sell magazine subscriptions online. One of their products was Women’s
Living, which aggregated content from 60 different magazines and had 1.7 million
subscribers at the time he published his book. Nicholas did an experiment. He gave a
cohort of users articles from the 10 best-converting magazines in the first 10 days of
their subscription. “One year later,” says Warrillow, “they saw that this cohort was
three times more valuable than the control group of customers. In other words, when
they packed a ton of value into the first 10 days of the relationship with a subscriber, it
was able to triple the lifetime value of the average customer.”83


7.5. Communicate the impact of what you do.

The churn rate of Spanish newspaper eldiario.es is extremely low for industry
standards. Around 88% of its members renew their subscription and 12% experience
some kind of problem, often insufficient money in their bank accounts or a card that


81
   J. Warrillow, ​The Automatic Customer. Creating a Subscription Business in Any Industry,​ Portfolio
Penguin, 2015, p. 175.
82
   J. Warrillow, ​The Automatic Customer. Creating a Subscription Business in Any Industry,​ Portfolio
Penguin, 2015, p. 186.
83
   J. Warrillow, ​The Automatic Customer. Creating a Subscription Business in Any Industry,​ Portfolio
Penguin, 2015, p. 180.


                                                                                                         67
has expired. The newspaper sends them an email and gives them three days to update
their data. They keep most of them during this process: eldiario.es churn rate is 5%.

Esther Alonso, head of marketing, sees big scoops as an opportunity for both retention
and acquisition. “It’s important to explain the impact of what we do but we have a
problem,” says Alonso. “Sometimes the impact of what you publish comes five years
later during a criminal trial. Then you have to explain this result wouldn’t have been
possible without the members’ support.” Scoops help eldiario.es get former members to
come back. In 2019, around 30% of the acquisition has come from that group.

The newspaper employs two people whose job is to respond by phone or by email to
any queries from its members. They’ve defined the lifetime cycle of every member and
send them an email after eldiario.es publishes important stories and at some critical
points. For example, just after they join and before they have to renew their
membership. In April 2019, they sent a 53-question survey to every member and 4.622
people answered. “They told us a lot of things about what we do,” says María Ramírez,
head of strategy at the newspaper. “They would like to see more foreign and
hyper-local coverage. Some told us they’d like to see more conservative voices among
our columnists too.”

When leaving, members of eldiario.es usually give two reasons. Around 70% say they
don’t have enough money to pay for their membership. The rest say they are not happy
with the editorial line. “Some thought this was an activist organisation. So when
eldiario.es publishes something against their favourite party, they get angry,” says
Alonso. The newspaper takes these cancellations very seriously. The editor-in-chief,
Ignacio Escolar, sends these people personal emails explaining his editorial decisions
and publishes a biweekly column addressing their concerns. These complaints, though,
are greatly exaggerated. Some of the readers who complain are not even members of
the newspaper. “This caused much churn a few years ago but not anymore,” says
Alonso. “We’re starting to see how some members even explain to other members what
our editorial independence really means.”



                                                                                         68
Most of the news outlets covered by this paper force their customers to make a phone
call to cancel their subscriptions. Swedish daily Dagens Nyheter and Spanish
newspapers eldiario.es and La Razón are the only ones that let their subscribers leave
by clicking on their sites. Readers often complain when they can’t cancel online. “By
making readers call, we keep more of them. I would say right over 50%,” says Chris
Duncan, managing director of The Times. “Some haven’t realised what the product is.
When talking to us, they understand what’s available to them. We’ll get to a point
where we will have to meet the expectation of automatic cancellation but we are not
there yet.”




                                                                                         69
8. Conclusion.
The goal of this paper was to look at​ the strategies that newspapers are using when
adopting reader revenue models. I have done this by interviewing 26 senior executives
who have gone through this process in legacy and digital-born news organisations,
mostly in the United Kingdom and Spain. Every chapter has covered a different aspect
any subscription company should pay attention to —from things to be done before
launch to shaping the value proposition, pricing, acquisition and churn.

Digital subscriptions are one of the key trends in the news industry. Newspapers and
magazines are embracing them in countries as diverse as Argentina, Poland, France,
Italy and Denmark. Half of the 232 media executives surveyed by the Reuters Institute
at the end of 2019 said that reader revenue would be their main income stream going
forward. Only 14% pinned their hopes on advertising alone84.

However, it’s worth keeping in mind that advertising is still the main revenue stream
for most of the newspapers featured in this paper and that most legacy publications
still get most of their income from print. Both realities will create tensions between
departments and will make it difficult for news organisations to apply any takeaways
from this paper. Change will require discipline and a clear mandate from the top.

Any publisher going into digital subscriptions should know it is entering a long
distance race. Reader revenue models are a marathon, not a sprint. They require
patience and some investment. They won’t redeem any bottom line overnight.

At the beginning digital subscriptions will be an additional (and probably small)
revenue stream. But they will provide publishers with valuable data about their most
loyal customers, and this data will allow them to refine their value proposition and
adapt their product to their customers’ needs.


84
 http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/publications/2020/journalism-media-and-technology-trends-and-predicti
ons-2020/​. Retrieved on February 17, 2020.



                                                                                                    70
This journey will require a more integrated organisation, with senior editors,
technologists, marketing experts and general managers working together more often
than ever before. Any important decisions should be shaped by data. Managers should
experiment with pricing and bundles as well as with innovative news products.
Acquisition and churn should be under the same department to avoid getting
subscribers who won’t stay for long.

Any publisher considering a shift to digital subscriptions must be aware that its outlet
will always compete with public service news organisations and news sites that make
their content available for free. This is an additional challenge and one that won’t go
away any time soon. In this kind of environment, news organisations need to learn to
articulate a clear vision and talk much more openly about their editorial mission, their
ownership and their finances. As Walter Lippmann famously said, “the news about the
news needs to be told.”

Hard data, not gut feelings should dictate the right reader revenue model for any news
organisation. Hard paywalls are increasingly rare. Most of the outlets covered here run
freemium or metered models with free trials and side doors. Even the more open news
organisations are embracing more transactional value propositions as they try to reach
beyond their most loyal readers after hitting a plateau. The most successful newspapers
are embracing propensity scores and dynamic paywalls that distinguish between
occasional readers and users that are likely to subscribe.

As these systems evolve through artificial intelligence, they may create a technology
gap between legacy news organisations and smaller outlets that don’t have the money
or the talent to compete.

Digital subscriptions will be challenging for any news brand without a clear editorial
mission. Data from the Reuters Institute’s Digital News Report shows that most people
who pay for news only buy a single news subscription. Global brands and specialized
outlets such as The Information and The Athletic flourish. Tabloids and clickbait sites
find it much more difficult to succeed. However, digital-only news sites such as


                                                                                          71
eldiario.es, Dennik N and Zetland have proved that smaller brands can also succeed in
this difficult ecosystem as long as they prove they are valuable for their audiences and
for democracy as a whole.




                                                                                       72
Appendix: interviewees




                         73
References
Albrecht, J., “Introducing Subscribe with Google”, ​Google Blog,​ March 20, 2018.
Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/google-news-initiative/introducing-subscribe-
google/

Alsever, J., “How 2 Software Guys Disrupted the Flower Business”, ​Inc.​ Retrieved on
July 28, 2019 from
https://www.inc.com/jennifer-alsever/inc.500-how-i-did-it-bryan-burkhart-h-bloom.h
tml

Arrese, Á., “From Gratis to Paywalls”, ​Journalism Studies​, Vol. 17, Issue 8, 2016, pp.
1051-1067.

Benton, J., “Want to see what one digital future for newspapers looks like? Look at The
Guardian, which isn’t losing money anymore”, ​Nieman Lab,​ May 1, 2019. Retrieved on
July 28, 2019 from
https://www.niemanlab.org/2019/05/want-to-see-what-one-digital-future-for-newspa
pers-looks-like-look-at-the-guardian-which-isnt-losing-money-anymore/

Davis, J., “How the FT drove digital subscriptions sales by 600 percent over Brexit
weekend”, ​Digiday​, June 29, 2016. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://digiday.com/uk/ft-drove-digital-subscriptions-sales-600-percent-brexit-weeke
nd/

El Mundo,​ “EL MUNDO presenta la forma de leer el periódico 'para todo el siglo XXI'”​,
March 4, 2010. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.elmundo.es/elmundo/2010/03/03/comunicacion/1267654313.html

El Mundo,​ “EL MUNDO cambia de piel y todos ganamos”, October 3, 2013. Retrieved on
July 28, 2019 from
https://www.elmundo.es/elmundo/2013/10/03/comunicacion/1380754334.html

El País​, “EL PAÍS lanza una nueva edición digital a la que se accederá por 0,2 euros
diarios”, November 16, 2002. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://elpais.com/diario/2002/11/16/sociedad/1037401211_850215.html

Fletcher, R., “Paying for News and the Limits of Subscription”, ​Digital News Report​,
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from




                                                                                           74
http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2019/paying-for-news-and-the-limits-of-sub
scription/

Fletcher, R. and Nielsen, R. K., “Paying for online news”, ​Digital Journalism, V
                                                                                ​ ol. 5,
Issue 9, 2017, pp. 1173-1191.

Financial Times​, “FT tops one million paying readers”, April 1, 2019. Retrieved on July
28, 2019 from
https://aboutus.ft.com/en-gb/announcements/ft-tops-one-million-paying-readers/

Gaceta de Prensa,​ “‘El correo español el pueblo vasco’ consigue los mejores resultados
de difusión en el último informe de la OJD”, October 22, 2014. Retrieved on July 30,
2019 from
https://www.gacetadeprensa.com/noticia/5030/actualidad/el-correo-espanol-el-pueblo
-vasco-consigue-los-mejores-resultados-de-difusion-en-el-ultimo-informe-de-la-ojd.
html

Grueskin, Bill, “The Case for Charging to Read WSJ.Com”, ​Reflections of a Newsosaur​,
March 22, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
http://newsosaur.blogspot.com.es/2009/03/case-for-charging-to-read-wsjcom.html

Gupta, S., ​Driving Digital Strategy. A Guide to Reimagining Your Business​, HBR Press,
2018.

Jacob, M. “Medill Study Identifies ‘Paradigm Shift’ in How Local News Serves Readers”,
Medill Local News Initiative, February 5, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://localnewsinitiative.northwestern.edu/posts/2019/02/05/northwestern-subscribe
r-data/index.html

Janzer, A., ​Subscription Marketing.​ ​Strategies for Nurturing Customers in a World of
Churn​, Cuesta Park Consulting, 2017.

Kalyanaram G., and Winer, R. S., “Empirical Generalizations from Reference Price
Research”, ​Marketing Science,​ vol. 14, no. 3, 1995, pp. G161–G169.
www.jstor.org/stable/184158

Kellman Baxter, R., ​The Membership Economy: Find Your Super Users, Master the Forever
Transaction, and Build Recurring Revenue,​ McGraw Hill-Education, 2015.

Lah T., and Wood, J.B., ​Technology-as-a-service: How to Grow a Profitable Subscription
business​, TSIA, 2016.




                                                                                           75
La Repubblica,​ “Il mondo Repubblica: ecco la nuova app che gira intorno a te”, July 26,
2018. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.repubblica.it/tecnologia/mobile/2018/07/26/news/repubblica_nuova_app_d
isponibile_store_apple_google_play-202751586/

Law, D., “Focusing on our core digital products”, ​Medium​, June 3, 2019. Retrieved on
July 28, 2019 from
https://medium.com/severe-contest/focusing-on-our-core-digital-products-8dd1d7a80
a20

Leitner, M., ​How media companies use data to sign up digital subscribers (and keep them)​,
Reuters Institute, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2019-05/How_media_compa
nies_use_data.pdf

Malik, O., “New York Times To Close Times Select Effective Midnight Tuesday; Will
Open Last 20 Years Of Archives”, ​GigaOm,​ September, 17, 2007. Retrieved on July 28,
2019 from
https://gigaom.com/2007/09/17/419-new-york-times-to-close-timesselect-effective-we
dnesday/

Negredo, S., Vara, A., Amoedo A., y Moreno, E., “Spain”, ​Digital News Report​, June 13,
2019. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2019/spain-2019/

Newman, N., “Attitudes to paying for online news”, Reuters Institute for the Study of
Journalism, August 2017. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2017-09/KM%20RISJ%20Pa
ying%20for%20online%20news%20-%20report%20230817_0.pdf

Nicholls, T., Shabbir, N., & Nielsen, R. K. (2016). Digital-Born News Media in Europe.
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. Retrieved from
https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:0037eea3-8f97-4bf3- a336-f86e21abfd0b

Oliver, L., “Times and Sunday Times paywall to go up tomorrow”, ​Journalism.co.uk​, July
1, 2010. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.journalism.co.uk/news/times-and-sunday-times-paywall-to-go-up-tomor
row/s2/a539431/

O’Reilly, L., “Why the Guardian believes readers will pay £15 a month to become
members”, ​Marketing Week,​ September 10, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from




                                                                                           76
https://www.marketingweek.com/2014/09/10/why-the-guardian-believes-readers-will-
pay-15-a-month-to-become-members/

Pérez-Peña, R., “Times to Stop Charging for Parts of Its Web Site”, ​The New York Times​,
September 18, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/18/business/media/18times.html

Picard, R., “Twilight or new dawn of journalism? Evidence from the changing news
ecosystem”, ​Journalism Studies​, vol. 15, Issue 5, 2014, pp. 500-510.

Pilkington, E., “Guardian and Washington Post win Pulitzer prize for NSA revelations”,
The Guardian​, April 14, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/14/guardian-washington-post-pulitzer-
nsa-revelations

Ponsford, D., “Guardian losses flat year on year at £30.6m but Trader sale swells bank
balance to £842.7m”, ​Press Gazette​, July 8, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.pressgazette.co.uk/guardian-losses-flat-year-on-year-at-306m-but-trader
-sale-swells-bank-balance-to-8427m/

Product Habits Blog​, “How Adobe Became a Successful $95 Billion SaaS Company”.
Retrieved on July 28, 2019 on
https://producthabits.com/adobe-95-billion-saas-company/

Rajan, A., “Guardian records first operating profit since 1998”, ​BBC,​ May 1, 2019,
Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-48111464

Schmidt, C., “Zetland’s members asked for an audio version — and now it’s more
popular than their written stories”, ​Nieman Lab​, May 9, 2018. Retrieved on July 28, 2019
from
https://www.niemanlab.org/2018/05/zetlands-members-asked-for-an-audio-version-a
nd-now-its-more-popular-than-their-written-stories/

Seale, S., “Dagens Nyheter moves to successful digital subscription model”, ​INMA
Conference Blog​, December 13, 2017. Retrieved on July 29, 2019 from
https://www.inma.org/blogs/conference/post.cfm/inma-webinar-dagens-nyheter-move
s-to-successful-digital-subscription-model

Simon, F. M. and Graves, L., “Pay Models in European News”, Reuters Institute for the
Study of Journalism, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from




                                                                                       77
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2019-05/Paymodels_for_Onl
ine_News_FINAL_1.pdf

Skrob, R. ​Retention Point. The Single Biggest Secret to Membership and Subscription
Growth​, Membership Services, 2018.

Soteras, J., “Los 10 principales periódicos españoles bajaron en 2018 sus ventas en el
quiosco”, ​Infolibre​, January 30, 2019. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://www.infolibre.es/noticias/medios/2019/01/30/ninguno_los_principales_periodic
os_espanoles_vende_quiosco_mas_000_ejemplares_mes_91317_1027.html

Southern, L., “​Newsletters as puzzle pieces’: How The Economist uses email to reduce
subscriber churn”,​ ​Digiday,​ July 5, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://digiday.com/media/economist-takes-less-approach-newsletters/

Southern, L., “How Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter halved subscriber churn in 2
years”, ​Digiday​, May 20, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://digiday.com/media/how-swedish-newspaper-dagens-nyheter-halved-churn-to-
8-in-2-years/

Scott, C., “Five lessons from the Guardian's membership strategy, three years on”​,
Journalism.co.uk,​ November 13, 2018. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
https://www.journalism.co.uk/news/five-lessons-from-the-guardian-s-membership-str
ategy-three-years-on/s2/a730347/

Sweeney, M., “Guardian launches new three-tier membership scheme”, ​The Guardian​,
September 10, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/sep/10/guardian-membership-scheme-patr
ons-kings-cross

Sweeney, M., “The Guardian overtakes New York Times in comScore traffic figures”,
The Guardian​, October 21, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/21/the-guardian-overtakes-new-york-ti
mes-in-comscore-traffic-figures

The Guardian​, “Guardian Media Group announces outcome of three year turnaround
strategy”,​ The Guardian,​ May 1, 2019. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/2019/may/01/guardian-media-group-a
nnounces-outcome-of-three-year-turnaround-strategy




                                                                                       78
The Guardian​, “ABCs: National daily newspaper circulation September 2014”, October
10, 2014. Retrieved on July 28, 2019 from
https://www.theguardian.com/media/table/2014/oct/10/abcs-national-newspapers

The Guardian​, “The Scott Trust: values and history”, July 26, 2015. Retrieved on July 28,
2019 from​ ​https://www.theguardian.com/the-scott-trust/2015/jul/26/the-scott-trust

Tzuo, T. ​Subscribed: Why the Subscription Model will be Your Company's Future - and
what to do about it​, Portfolio Penguin, 2018

Warrillow, J., ​The Automatic Customer. Creating a Subscription Business in Any Industry,​
Portfolio Penguin, 2015.

Whitehead R. and Wilkinson, E. J., “The Media Subscriptions Blueprint”, ​INMA,​ April
2018. Retrieved on July 30, 2019 from
http://www.dagensmedier.no/globalassets/rapporter/inma_2018digitalsubscriptions.pd
f

Zuora, “The Subscription Economy Index”, March 2019. Retrieved on July 29, 2019
from
http://info.zuora.com/rs/602-QGZ-447/images/subscription-economy-index-q4-2018.p
df




                                                                                         79
